David E. Steitz
Headquarters, Washington           March 7, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1730)

Alan Buis
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
(Phone: 818/354-0474)

RELEASE: 02-46

GRACE SPACE TWINS SET TO TEAM UP 
TO TRACK EARTH'S WATER AND GRAVITY

     NASA and the German Space Agency are preparing to launch 
the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), a 
scientific pathfinder mission that will test a novel approach 
to tracking how water is transported and stored within the 
Earth's environment. The mission will precisely measure the 
planet's shifting water masses and map their effects on 
Earth's gravity field, yielding new information on effects of 
global climate change.

The twin GRACE satellites are set to launch March 16, 2002, 
from Russia on a five-year mission that will revolutionize 
understanding of changes in the Earth's gravity field over 
time and space. The mission will provide measurements of the 
gravity field that are far more accurate and sensitive than 
any that can be obtained by ground-based observations or 
single remote-sensing spacecraft. 

"GRACE marks the first launch of NASA's Earth System Science 
Pathfinder program, designed to develop new measurement 
technologies for studying our Earth system," said Dr. Ghassem 
Asrar, associate administrator for NASA's Earth Science 
Enterprise, NASA Headquarters, Washington. "Through NASA's 
continuing investment in technology development, we've been 
able to create an innovative mission at a fraction of the 
cost of missions formulated just a decade ago. GRACE will 
provide us with a new view of our home planet and help us to 
better understand climate change and its global impacts such 
as changes in sea level and the availability of water 
resources," Asrar said.

A more precise gravity map of Earth is expected to increase 
the accuracy of many techniques used by scientists who study 
Earth with space-based instruments. These techniques -- 
ranging from satellite altimetry and radar interferometry to 
digital terrain models covering large land and ice areas -- 
provide critical input to many scientific models used in 
oceanography, hydrology, glaciology, geology and related 
disciplines. 

As they race around the globe 16 times a day, the satellites 
will sense minute variations in the Earth's surface mass 
below and corresponding variations in the Earth's 
gravitational pull. Regions of slightly stronger gravity will 
affect the lead satellite first, pulling it slightly away 
from the trailing satellite. By measuring the constantly 
changing distance between the two satellites and combining 
that data with precise positioning measurements from Global 
Positioning System instruments, scientists will be able to 
construct a precise Earth gravity map.  

GRACE is the first Earth-monitoring mission in the history of 
space flight whose key measurement is not derived from 
electromagnetic waves bounced off the Earth's surface. 
Instead, the mission will use a microwave ranging system to 
accurately measure changes in the speed and distance between 
two identical spacecraft flying in a polar orbit about 220 
kilometers (137 miles) apart, 500 kilometers (311 miles) 
above Earth. The ranging system is so sensitive it can detect 
separation changes as small as 10 microns -- about one-tenth 
the width of a human hair over a distance of 220 kilometers.

An additional instrument aboard the satellites called an 
atmospheric limb sounder will measure the amount by which the 
Global Positioning System satellite signals are distorted by 
Earth's atmosphere. Scientists will use these data to improve 
the accuracy of key atmospheric observations, which serve as 
input for weather forecast models.

GRACE is a joint partnership between NASA and the German 
Center for Air and Space Flight (Deutsches Zentrum fur Luft 
und Rumfahrt, or DLR). The U.S. portion of the project is 
managed for NASA's Office of Earth Science, Washington, by 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, Calif. 
Science data processing, distribution, archiving and product 
verification are managed under a cooperative arrangement 
between JPL and the University of Texas' Austin-based Center 
for Space Research in the United States and Germany's Earth 
Research Center (or GeoForschungsZentrum).  

More information about the GRACE program is available on the 
GRACE web site at:

http://www.csr.utexas.edu/grace

Information on NASA's Earth System Science Pathfinder Program 
may be found at:

http://essp.gsfc.nasa.gov

                         -end-

