Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington              Jan. 31, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

Nancy Neal
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-0039)

RELEASE: 02-19

EUVE SPACECRAFT RE-ENTERS EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE

     NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) re-entered 
the Earth's atmosphere at approximately 11:15 p.m. EST 
Wednesday. According to calculations made by the United 
States Space Command Space Control Center, EUVE re-entered 
the atmosphere over central Egypt. 

"The actual location of EUVE's re-entry was within the 
predicted orbit track," said Scott Hull, spacecraft 
engineering lead for space science mission operations, at 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. "We expected 
EUVE could come in at a number of points along the ground 
track." 

EUVE did not have an on-board propulsion system to allow 
engineers to control the spacecraft's re-entry. Using U.S. 
Space Command data, engineers calculated EUVE's orbit track 
and predicted where it could re-enter the atmosphere. EUVE 
was in a 28.5-degree orbit and could re-enter in any location 
within this orbit range. This range included areas as far 
north as Orlando, Fla., and as far south as Brisbane, 
Australia.

The object was not designed to survive re-entry intact and 
was expected to break apart and mostly burn up in the 
atmosphere. U.S. Space Command cannot confirm if any pieces 
survived re-entry.

EUVE was launched on July 7, 1992. Science operations ended 
in December 2000. During its eight years in orbit, EUVE was 
the first astrophysics mission to explore the extreme 
ultraviolet-and helped to bridge the gap in our understanding 
of this previously unknown spectrum. EUVE observed more than 
1,000 nearby sources, including more than three dozen objects 
outside our galaxy.

Additional background information about EUVE is available at 

http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/euve/euve.html


                        -end-





