Michael Braukus
Headquarters, Washington           Jan. 22, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1979)

Jonas Dimo
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
(Phone: 650/604-5612)

RELEASE: 02-14

NASA SOFTWARE TO HELP SPEED AIRCRAFT DEPARTURES 

     Researchers aim to avert airport gridlock with a new 
software tool being evaluated in NASA's virtual control tower 
simulator.

NASA researchers and Dallas/Fort Worth air traffic 
controllers conducted the second evaluation of the Surface 
Management System (SMS), being developed at NASA's Ames 
Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif. Current systems used 
by airports don't provide controllers with accurate 
information about the number of future departures. During the 
various "rush hour" times at the airport, scheduled 
departures often exceed runway capacity, creating delays.

"The main objective of the Surface Management System is to 
allow the controllers and airlines to collaboratively manage 
departure operations and surface movements. The system 
gathers relevant information from multiple sources, processes 
it and displays the appropriate information and advisories to 
the users," said Dr. Steve Atkins, SMS project lead at Ames. 
"The system has the potential to decrease departure delays 
significantly," he added.

The information compiled by the system is displayed as 
aircraft-location maps, departure timelines and load-capacity 
graphs giving controllers timely data to effectively manage 
aircraft movement between the terminal and the runway. With 
this information, controllers can predict possible traffic 
congestion and rapidly eliminate system bottlenecks.  

Ames' Future Flight Central (FFC) air-traffic control tower 
simulator was used for the evaluation. Future Flight central 
gives controllers a unique facility to test software tools 
with its detailed 360-degree views, providing controllers a 
very realistic experience. The data collected will be used to 
refine the SMS user interface and identify additional user 
features. 

"We presented a spectrum of ideas to a group of Federal 
Aviation Administration controllers and airline 
representatives to help us focus on what potential 
capabilities would be most helpful. Our ideas have been 
received positively," said Atkins.

The realism provided by FFC will allow for the smooth 
transition to the field-test portion of the evaluation. 
Additional features such as integration with arrival 
scheduling and other air traffic management tools will be 
added as part of the staged evolution of the tool.  

Other participants in the evaluation were representatives 
from the Federal Aviation Administration's Free Flight 
Program office, officials from major passenger and freight 
carriers, and controllers from Memphis, Tenn., and Norfolk, 
Va., airports. 

The Surface Management System is being developed at Ames by 
the Advanced Air Transportation Technologies Project, a part 
of the Aviation Systems Capacity Program. Ames has been 
conducting air-traffic control research and development since 
the mid-1980s.

More information about the Aviation Systems Capacity Program 
can be found on the Internet at:

http://www.asc.nasa.gov/

More information about Future Flight Central is available at:

http://ffc.arc.nasa.gov

                        - end -

