Dwayne Brown/Bob Jacobs
Headquarters, Washington             March 4, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726/1600)

RELEASE: 02-43

NASA ADMINISTRATOR NAMES GREGORY
ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR FOR SPACE FLIGHT

     NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe today named Frederick D. 
Gregory as the Associate Administrator for Space Flight, 
placing him permanently in charge of the agency's Human 
Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. 

Gregory, 60, has served as Acting Associate Administrator for 
the office since December, when he replaced Joseph H. 
Rothenberg, who retired.

"I am pleased Fred agreed to make this commitment to what is 
one of the most important positions within NASA," said 
Administrator O'Keefe. "He brings great experience and 
leadership to this office, and his commitment to safety is 
vital as our human space flight program moves forward."

Astronaut William F. Readdy will remain in the critical 
senior leadership position of Deputy Associate Administrator 
for Space Flight with expanded responsibilities over major 
programs, operations and management of the Human Exploration 
and Development of Space Enterprise.

Before accepting his appointment in the Office of Space 
Flight, Gregory was the Associate Administrator for Safety 
and Mission Assurance. The veteran astronaut was the senior 
executive responsible for the safety and reliability of all 
NASA programs.

Gregory was selected as an astronaut in 1978, after a 
distinguished career with the U.S. Air Force. He logged 
nearly 7,000 hours in 50 types of aircraft, including 550 
combat missions over Vietnam. At NASA, Gregory logged more 
than 455 hours in space during three Space Shuttle missions. 
In 1985, he served as pilot on board Challenger during STS-
51B. Gregory was mission commander for STS-33 in 1989 and 
STS-44 in 1991.

"This is an exciting time for the Office of Space Flight and 
this agency," said Gregory. "I deeply appreciate 
Administrator O'Keefe's confidence in me, and I will work to 
meet his objectives to make space exploration safe and more 
affordable, and to involve the public in the benefits and 
excitement of human space flight."

Gregory has been awarded the Defense Superior Service Medal, 
two Distinguished Flying Crosses, the Defense Meritorious 
Service Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal, 16 Air Medals, 
The Air Force Commendation Medal and three NASA Space Flight 
medals.

His honors also include the NASA Distinguished Service Medal, 
the NASA Outstanding Leadership Award, the National Society 
of Black Engineers Distinguished National Scientist Award, 
the George Washington University Distinguished Alumni Award 
and an "Ira Eaker Fellow" by the Air Force Association.

Additional information about Gregory is available on the 
Internet at:

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/codeq/

http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/gregory-fd.html

                           -end-











