David E. Steitz
Headquarters, Washington               Jan. 22, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1730)

Alan Buis
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
(Phone: 818/354-0474)

Eric Berryman
National Imaging and Mapping Agency (NIMA), Bethesda, Md.
(Phone: 301/227-3132)

RELEASE: 02-15

PICTURES FROM THE REAL EDGE: NASA POSTS U.S. TOPOGRAPHY DATA

     Displaying spectacular new 3-D images and animations of 
California from space, scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, Calif., today announced the release 
of high-resolution topographic data of the continental United 
States gathered during the February 2000 Shuttle Radar 
Topography Mission (SRTM) -- a mission that is creating the 
world's best topographic map. 

"The release of the California mosaic and continental-U.S. SRTM 
data is a tantalizing preview of things to come from this 
program," said Michael Kobrick, JPL SRTM project scientist. "We 
are processing data for the rest of the world on a continent-
by-continent basis, mapping and exploring many relatively 
unknown regions where our maps will be far more precise than 
the best global maps in use today."

Yunjin Kim, JPL SRTM project manager, said users in the U.S. 
and elsewhere would find wide applications for the data. "The 
maps produced from the mission will be among the most valuable, 
universally beneficial data ever produced by a science mission. 
National and local government organizations, scientists, 
commercial enterprises and civilians alike will find the data 
useful for applications as diverse as earthquake studies, flood 
control, transportation and urban planning, enhanced ground-
collision warning systems for aircraft and better placement of 
cell phone towers," he explained.

With today's release, gigabytes of digital elevation-model 
data, sampled at an interval of one measurement every 30 meters 
(98 feet), are now available to selected science investigators, 
with 90-meter (295-foot) sample imagery available to the 
general public. Processing and distribution of validated U.S. 
digital topographic data will continue on a regular basis, with 
completion expected this spring. 

When completed in fall 2002, more than 12 terabytes of data 
encompassing nearly 1 trillion measurements will have been 
processed, representing 80 percent of Earth's land mass between 
60 degrees north and 56 degrees south of the equator. The areas 
mapped are home to approximately 95 percent of the world's 
population. 

Thomas A. Hennig, National Imaging and Mapping Agency's (NIMA) 
program manager for SRTM said, "SRTM literally captured a 
snapshot of the Earth's surface at the beginning of the 21st 
century that will be of tremendous value for years to come. The 
SRTM data will provide NIMA's customers a revolutionary leap 
forward in imaging information." NIMA partnered with NASA, 
Germany and Italy in sponsorship of the SRTM flight.

The centerpiece of today's release is the California mosaic, a 
color-shaded relief elevation map. The image depicts California 
at a data-sample interval of 3 arc-seconds (approximately 90 
meters or 295 feet). The map depicts changes in height as 
colors, with blues and greens at the lower elevations, rising 
through yellows and browns to white at the highest elevations. 

The California mosaic image and animations are available at:
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/

As processing of each continent is finished, data will be sent 
to NIMA for final quality checking and copies sent to the 
United States Geological Survey's EROS Data Center, Sioux 
Falls, S.D., for final archiving and distribution. 

The SRTM was flown aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour Feb. 11-22, 
2000. It used modified versions of the same instruments that 
comprised the Space Shuttle Imaging Radar-C/X-Band Synthetic 
Aperture Radar that flew twice on Endeavour in 1994. 

The mission collected 3-D measurements of Earth's land surface 
using radar interferometry, which compares two radar images 
taken at slightly different locations to obtain elevation or 
surface-change information. To collect the data, engineers 
added a 60-meter (197-foot) mast, installed additional C-band 
and X-band antennas, and improved tracking and navigation 
devices. 

The SRTM mission supports NASA's Earth Science Enterprise, 
Washington, a long-term research and technology program 
designed to examine Earth's land, oceans, atmosphere, ice and 
life as a total integrated system. 

                         -end-
