Michael Braukus
Headquarters, Washington             March 14, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1979)

Victoria Kushnir
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
(Phone: 650/604-0176)

RELEASE: 02-51

NASA TECHNOLOGY HELPS INDUSTRIAL LEADERS BUILD FACILITIES

     Virtual reality software, originally developed by NASA 
engineers to help explore Mars, is now being used by a 
leading petrochemical company to build and plan operations 
for a complex industrial facility in 'virtual world' 
simulations.

The Mars Map virtual reality software, developed at NASA Ames 
Research Center in the heart of California's Silicon Valley, 
guided scientists through the agency's very successful 1997 
Mars Pathfinder mission. The tool allows mission scientists 
and operations personnel to command and control remote 
robotic spacecraft within a virtual environment. 

Recently, Reality Capture Technologies (RCT), Inc. of San 
Jose, Calif., was granted a license for further development 
of the platform. RCT is now deploying this productivity- and 
life-cycle information-management tool at a new Shell 
Chemicals process plant currently under construction in 
Geismar, La.  

"Our product, based on NASA technology, will allow Shell to 
create and validate start-up procedures, in addition to a 
construction-feasibility review, and commence training in a 
virtual environment months before the plant is fully built," 
said Reality Capture Technologies' Chief Executive Officer 
Dr. Ted Blackmon. 

RCT's software enables engineers to simulate a plant 
environment in order to review its 'constructability,' a 
process of evaluating the design, scheduling, cost and 
resource planning to assess the possibility of implementing 
such a design. The software also allows engineers to create 
operating procedures, training and documentation. Similar to 
pilot training on flight simulators, this technology enables 
plant operators to get the training they need in a virtual 
environment. 

"What makes this software even more unique is how simple it 
is," said Blackmon.  "It is almost like a video game where 
you hold a joystick and walk around making sure that 
everything is working right. Only in this case, you walk 
around a not-yet-built Shell plant," he added.

By fusing software systems used during the design stage with 
those used during construction, the software provides virtual 
access to a construction site and permits project personnel 
to manage, assess, control and respond more effectively to 
changes in the plant's complex construction. Like space 
explorers who use Mars Map to learn how to get around the Red 
Planet, facility operators can use the new tool to learn how 
to better 'pilot' the sophisticated and expensive industrial-
plant asset. 
 
"Operators can now easily access and understand engineering 
information that is critical to operations, which makes their 
job much easier and safer," said Blackmon.   

An Ames science team originally developed Mars Map to create 
a photographic-quality rendering system. Mars Map allowed 
researchers to better understand the surface of Mars and 
perform more effective science by providing an accurate 
visual representation of the planetary terrain. 

"The Mars Pathfinder mission was the first test of this new 
class of photo-realistic, virtual-reality systems," said Dr. 
Michael Sims of Ames, who managed the Mars Map development 
team. "Mars Map made a big difference in our understanding of 
Mars during Pathfinder, and made us realize that this 
technology could be an extremely powerful tool for the 
rendering of the world."

"RCT uniquely addresses the link between various stages of a 
facility's 'life-cycle,' leveraging information generated 
during the design stage through construction and subsequently 
into operations and maintenance," said Blackmon. "By 
leveraging advanced software, originally developed at NASA 
for the space program, we are able to effectively 'bridge the 
islands of automation' that exist in the 
engineering/construction/operations industry today, and 
interconnect traditionally stand-alone software systems into 
an end-to-end distributed computing platform." 

"This company is a resident of the Ames Technology 
Commercialization Center, a technology incubator located in 
San Jose," said Phil Herlth of the Ames Commercial Technology 
Office. "Their commercial partnership with a major chemical 
company is another example of a successful transfer of a 
space technology that is now benefiting people here on earth. 
"

                          -end-

