Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington             May 9, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

Bill Steigerwald
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-5017)

RELEASE 02-84

EARTH'S SPACE-STORM SHIELD OFFERS PROTECTION -- AT A PRICE

     New observations from a NASA spacecraft reveal that a 
layer in the Earth's outer atmosphere acts like a heat shield 
by absorbing energy from space storms and reducing their 
ability to heat the lower atmosphere. However, it imposes a 
heavy toll for its services by creating a billion-degree 
cloud of electrified gas, or plasma, that surrounds the 
planet. 

The plasma cloud is so ferociously hot, its particles act 
like radiation, occasionally disrupting satellites in mid- to 
high-altitude orbits. This discovery from NASA's Imager for 
Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft 
confirms the Earth actively participates in space storms.  

Although past space missions gave provisional evidence for 
this behavior, IMAGE provides the first global picture of the 
active role Earth's ionosphere plays in space storms, which 
is very different from the earlier view that the solar wind 
itself supplied the energetic particles responsible for these 
storms. 

The Earth's space-storm shield is a tenuous layer of the 
outer atmosphere (outer ionosphere) between 180 and 620 miles 
(300-1,000 kilometers) high that includes electrically 
charged atoms. "Just as a heat shield sacrifices itself by 
allowing its outer layers to slough off during the fiery 
reentry of a spacecraft, Earth's shield absorbs space-storm 
energy by throwing some of its charged particles into space," 
said Stephen Fuselier of the Lockheed-Martin Advanced 
Technology Center, Palo Alto, Calif., lead author of the 
first of two papers on this discovery to be published in the 
Journal of Geophysical Research. 

"But this protection comes with a high price, because the 
expelled particles gain tremendous speed as they leave the 
atmosphere, become trapped by the Earth's magnetic field and 
ultimately encircle the Earth, where they form a hot plasma 
cloud around the planet," said Donald Mitchell of the Johns 
Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Md., lead author 
of the second paper. Approximately half the energy deposited 
by space storms in the atmosphere is absorbed this way, 
according to the researchers.

The solar wind, a thin, high-velocity plasma, blows 
constantly from the Sun at an average speed of 250 miles per 
second (400 kilometers/sec). If the Earth had no global 
magnetic field, or magnetosphere, the solar wind would impact 
the atmosphere directly and gradually erode it. Instead, the 
solar wind slams into the Earth's magnetosphere and is 
diverted around the planet. Buffeting of the magnetosphere is 
more intense during space storms, when explosive events on 
the Sun give the solar wind an unusually high velocity or 
density, or a particularly potent magnetic-field 
configuration.

Although the magnetosphere does a good job staving off the 
solar wind, Earth is not home free. Since the solar-wind 
plasma is comprised of electrically charged particles moving 
rapidly past the Earth's magnetic field, a multimillion amp 
electric current is generated, which flows down the Earth's 
invisible magnetic field lines and pumps up to a trillion 
watts of power into the magnetosphere -- especially above the 
polar regions, where the aurora (northern and southern 
lights) form. Without the space-storm shield, heat from these 
enormous electric currents would cause Earth's lower 
atmosphere (lower ionosphere) to expand and increase orbit-
disrupting drag on spacecraft.

The first IMAGE result shows the Earth's shield in action as 
it absorbs a space storm's electric current and is ejected 
into space. Fuselier used the Low Energy Neutral Atom imager 
instrument on IMAGE to discover electrically charged oxygen 
atoms are ejected into space immediately in response to the 
bursts of ionosphere-heating by the massive electric 
currents. The amount of ionosphere lost during a typical 
space storm is around a few hundred tons, about equal to the 
mass of the air in the Louisiana Superdome, according to the 
team.

The second IMAGE observation shows the price paid for the 
shield's protection. Because of their electric charge, the 
expelled oxygen ions feel magnetic forces and are trapped 
within the Earth's vast magnetosphere, where they follow 
magnetic field lines like cars on a highway. Scientists know 
the magnetosphere distorts under the impact of the solar 
wind, like an umbrella in a windstorm. In particular, the 
region of the magnetosphere facing away from the Sun is 
stretched into a long, tail-like shape as the solar wind 
blows by. Because magnetic fields have tension, they resist 
stretching and behave like rubber bands. When the stretching 
becomes too great, the night-side magnetosphere snaps back 
towards Earth, carrying the ejected ions from the ionosphere 
with it like an enormous slingshot. 

Mitchell used the High Energy Neutral Atom imager instrument 
on IMAGE to observe that these ions, now accelerated to 
enormous velocities (about 2,500 miles per second or 4,000 
km/sec), appear immediately in the aurora and in the cloud of 
hot plasma that encircles the Earth during space storms. 
Earth contributes material and the solar wind supplies the 
energy that transforms this cool atmospheric material into a 
dangerously hot plasma cloud. If it were not for the Earth's 
own ionosphere supplying material, the hot plasma cloud would 
be very much diminished. 

This new view is helping scientists to better understand the 
effects of space storms which create moving plasma clouds 
that interfere with navigation using Global Positioning 
System satellites. Images and more information are available 
at:
http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/20020509imagessu.html
                        -end-
