Paula Cleggett
Headquarters, Washington            April 17, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1400)

Victoria Dinnick
IMAX Corporation, Toronto
(Phone: 905/403-6366)

RELEASE: 02-67

NEW IMAX FILM TAKES MOVIEGOERS ON 3D SPACE STATION TOUR

     NASA astronauts-turned-film-makers will be joined by 
Hollywood's top gun at the Smithsonian's National Air and 
Space Museum in Washington tonight to help launch the first 
3D cinematic journey to the International Space Station.

The new IMAX 3D movie "SPACE STATION 3D," photographed by 
NASA astronauts, Russian cosmonauts and narrated by Academy 
Award nominee Tom Cruise, premieres Wednesday night at a 
special event at the museum's newly renovated theater. 
Cruise, along with NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe and a host 
of dignitaries and aerospace executives, is expected to be on 
hand for the movie's debut. Lockheed Martin sponsors the film 
in cooperation with NASA. 

Transported by the visually stunning effects of IMAX 3D 
technology, moviegoers blast off into space with the 
astronauts and cosmonauts who are hard at work building the 
most complicated research project ever attempted.

"The 3D imagery captured by the IMAX cameras allows those of 
us on the ground to experience life in the weightlessness of 
space," said NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe. "It's an 
amazing piece of work that we hope may help inspire a new 
generation of explorers. You see what it's really like to 
live in orbit, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, traveling 
around the world at more than 17,000 miles per hour."

Between December 1998 and August 2000, more than 13 miles of 
film flew into space for use in two IMAX 3D cameras. Working 
closely with IMAX, 25 astronauts and cosmonauts were trained 
to use the high-tech equipment. They had to learn how to be 
directors, cinematographers, and lighting and sound experts.

"We at Lockheed Martin are proud to have helped in educating 
millions around the world on both the importance of space to 
our planet's future and the joy of working and living in 
orbit," said Dennis Boxx, Lockheed Martin's Senior Vice 
President, Corporate Communications. "Through these films, 
the corporation has helped foster international understanding 
of space, build stronger relations with our NASA customer, 
and aided the National Air and Space Museum by providing a 
series of films that have generated visitors to our country's 
most import and popular museum."

The successful team of NASA, IMAX and Lockheed Martin has 
produced five challenging and inspiring space films, 
including "The Dream Is Alive" (1985), "Blue Planet" (1990), 
"Destiny in Space" (1994) and "Mission to Mir" (1997), 
exposing people around the world to the wonders of space 
exploration.

This latest achievement details the challenges, setbacks and 
ultimately the shared victory of the pioneering men and women 
who are making possible the first international space 
laboratory. "Space Station" is the story of the unique 
partnership of 16 nations to build a permanent science 
outpost in low Earth orbit.

"We are very excited by the enthusiasm "SPACE STATION 3D" is 
generating in the IMAX theatre network," said IMAX co-CEOs 
Richard L. Gelfond and Bradley J. Wechsler.  "Only a handful 
of highly skilled individuals will ever actually travel to 
space but the astronauts and cosmonauts involved in this 
project have told us that only IMAX captures their experience 
and recreates the excitement and awe that they have felt in 
this unique environment.  We believe that this ground-
breaking film will inspire generations of students to focus 
on the next frontier and enable millions of people to 
experience space."

Additional details about the film are available on a special 
interactive Web site, filled with in-depth information, a 
photo gallery, astronaut interviews and a complete guide to 
showings. The Web site is at:

http://www.imax.com/spacestation

More information about the International Space Station and 
the four expedition crews is available on the Web at:

http://spaceflight.nasa.gov

                            -end-
