Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington                    Jan. 29, 2002
(Phone: 202-358-1727)

Susan Hendrix
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301-286-7745)

RELEASE NO: 02-17

NEW LAUNCH DATE SET FOR HESSI SPACECRAFT

     NASA's High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) 
remains on track for a Feb. 5 launch. HESSI will study solar 
flares - gigantic explosions in the atmosphere of the Sun- 
with a unique kind of X-ray vision, producing the very first 
high-fidelity color movies of solar flares during their 
highest energy emissions. 

HESSI will be carried aloft inside a Pegasus XL rocket under 
the belly of Orbital Science Corporation's Stargazer L-1011 
aircraft. The L-1011 is scheduled to lift off from Cape 
Canaveral Air Force Station, Fla., at 3:21 p.m. EST. After the 
aircraft is about 40,000 feet over the Atlantic Ocean, it will 
drop the Pegasus rocket. Following a free fall and a series of 
short rocket motor burns, the rocket will deliver HESSI to its 
373-mile (600-kilometer) circular orbit above the Earth, 
inclined at 38 degrees to the equator.

In order to understand what triggers a solar flare and how it 
explosively releases energy, scientists need to identify the 
kinds of particles being accelerated, locate the regions where 
the acceleration occurs, and determine when the particles get 
accelerated. The most direct tracer of these accelerated 
particles is the X-ray and gamma ray radiation they produce as 
they travel through the solar atmosphere. 

The spacecraft's sole instrument, an imaging spectrometer, 
will construct flare images from patterns of light and 
shadows, that are produced by high-energy radiation as it 
passes through the instrument's grids while the spacecraft 
rotates.

Inside solar flare explosions, magnetic fields twist, snap and 
recombine, blasting particles to almost the speed of light and 
firing solar gas to tens of millions of degrees. This intense 
action causes the solar atmosphere to sizzle with high-energy 
X-rays and gamma rays and drives proton and electron particles 
into the solar system. Radiation and particles from solar 
flares can sometimes affect orbiting spacecraft. 

HESSI was originally scheduled for launch in July 2000, but 
was postponed after the satellite suffered damage during 
vibration testing. Since then, flight delays due to launch 
vehicle failures have affected the launch date. However, 
officials have since cleared the way for next Tuesday's 
scheduled launch.

In order for scientists to understand the physical processes 
and conditions within flares, they will use the spectrometer 
aboard HESSI to create images of the gamma rays and highest 
energy X-rays emitted by each flare. These images will be the 
first to simultaneously measure the location and energy 
content of radiation from the flare material and should 
improve predictability of flare occurrences at the Sun and the 
subsequent consequences we experience here on Earth. 

Working together with several other solar spacecraft such as 
the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), Geostationary 
Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES), and Transition 
Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) for flare radiation, as 
well as Wind, Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), Ulysses, 
and Voyager for particle detection, HESSI will provide 
scientists with vital insight into the impulsive energy 
release and particle acceleration processes at the Sun.  

The HESSI mission costs about $85 million, which includes the 
spacecraft, launch vehicle, mission operations and data 
analysis. The Explorers Program Office at NASA Goddard Space 
Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., will provide mission management 
and technical oversight under the auspices of NASA's Office of 
Space Science in Washington. 

For detailed information about HESSI and its science mission, 
go to: 

http://hesperia.gsfc.nasa.gov/hessi

http://hessi.ssl.berkeley.edu/

                             -end-
