Bob Jacobs
Headquarters, Washington             Feb. 12, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1600)

Eileen Hawley
Johnson Space Center, Houston
(Phone: 281/483-5111)

RELEASE: 02-27

NASA ASTRONAUT, DR. SHANNON LUCID, SELECTED AS CHIEF 
SCIENTIST

     NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe today selected space 
veteran and NASA astronaut Dr. Shannon W. Lucid as the 
agency's next Chief Scientist.

The only woman to be awarded the Congressional Space Medal of 
Honor by the President of the United States, Lucid currently 
supports Space Shuttle and International Space Station 
missions as spacecraft communicator.

Lucid will be responsible for ensuring the scientific merit 
of the agency's programs. She will report for duty as soon as 
she fills her responsibilities as Capcom for STS-109.

"Dr. Lucid brings impressive credentials in the fields 
chemistry and biochemistry research to NASA Headquarters," 
said Administrator O'Keefe. "The Chief Scientist has a 
tremendous responsibility to develop and communicate the 
agency's science and research objectives to the outside 
world. What better selection than a NASA scientist and 
astronaut with extensive experience living and working in the 
harsh environment of space?"

She replaces Dr. Kathie Olsen, whom the President has 
announced his intention to nominate as the Associate 
Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) 
in the Executive Office of the President.

"Dr. Olsen has been a vital and valuable member of the senior 
management team since she was named Chief Scientist in May 
1999," added Administrator O'Keefe. "She is highly motivated 
and her expertise will be missed. The Administration and OSTP 
are getting a top-notch researcher and scientist."

A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid was among the 
first six women ever selected to become an astronaut and she 
currently holds the United States single mission flight 
endurance record as a result of her mission to the Russian 
space station Mir in 1996.

She was selected by NASA in 1978 and became an astronaut in 
August 1979. Lucid has flown as a mission specialist on STS-
51G in 1985, STS-34 in 1989, STS-43 in 1991 and STS-58 in 
1993. In 1996, she was flown to Mir during STS-76, where she 
served as an engineer and conducted numerous life science and 
physical science experiments during her stay in orbit.

When Lucid returned to Earth during STS-79, she had traveled 
more than 75 million miles and spent more than 188 days in 
orbit.

Additional information about Lucid is available on the 
Internet at:

http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/bios/htmlbios/lucid.html


                            -end-


