Kyle Herring
Headquarters, Washington                                  Feb. 15, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-4504)

George Diller
Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
(Phone: 321/867-2468)

James Hartsfield
Johnson Space Center, Houston
(Phone: 281/483-5111)

RELEASE: 02-29

COLUMBIA BEGINS THIRD DECADE IN SPACE WITH FEB. 28 LIFTOFF

 America's first Space Shuttle, Columbia, will return to orbit fresh from 
two years of work that have left it safer and more capable than ever 
before.

Columbia is set to launch Feb. 28 at 6:48 a.m. EST on mission STS-109, 
pending review of data on the Space Shuttle's hydraulic pump attach 
bolts. The mission is dedicated to maintaining and enhancing the Hubble 
Space Telescope, the fourth such flight since the telescope's launch in 
1990.

"Returning Columbia to orbit to improve the Hubble Space Telescope is a 
fitting start to what will be a busy and vital year in space." said 
Space Shuttle Program Manager Ron Dittemore. "We have more spacewalks 
planned in the next 12 months than we have ever done in a single year. 
We are going to fly diverse missions, dedicated to satellite 
maintenance, research and Space Station assembly, showcasing 
capabilities unique in the world. The shuttle team has done a great job 
in preparing for this mission."

A maintenance and upgrade period completed last year installed a new 
"glass cockpit" in Columbia, increased its cargo capacity, strengthened 
its crew cabin and enhanced the protection of its cooling system from 
orbital debris. 

Columbia's new cockpit replaced mechanical instruments with 11 full-
color, flat-panel displays. The new cockpit is lighter, uses less 
electricity and sets the stage for the next generation of improvements -
- a "smart cockpit" under development that will make the cabin even more 
user-friendly. 

Columbia is the second of NASA's four Space Shuttles to be fitted with 
the new "glass cockpit." Technicians also performed comprehensive 
inspections of the Space Shuttle's more than 200 miles of electrical 
wiring, installing protection to prevent future damage in high-traffic 
areas. Intensive structural inspection of Columbia also was performed as 
well as 133 modifications and upgrades.

The orbiter will fly under the command of Scott Altman (Cmdr., USN). 
Duane Carey (Lt. Col., USAF) will serve as pilot. Mission specialists 
will be John Grunsfeld, Nancy Currie (Lt. Col., USA), Richard Linnehan, 
James Newman and Michael Massimino. Grunsfeld, Linnehan, Newman and 
Massimino will work in alternating teams of two to perform the five 
planned spacewalks.

Columbia's flight is scheduled to end with landing back at NASA's 
Kennedy Space Center in Florida March 11. STS-109 marks the 27th mission 
for Columbia and the 108th in Shuttle program history.

Additional information about STS-109 is available on the Internet at:

http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/

-end-
