Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington               Feb. 27, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

Steve Roy
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
(Phone: 256/544-6535) 

Megan Watzke
Chandra X-ray Observatory Center, Cambridge, Mass.
(Phone: 617/496-7998)

RELEASE: 02-34

JUPITER HOT SPOT MAKES TROUBLE FOR THEORY

     A pulsating hot spot of X-rays has been discovered in the 
polar regions of Jupiter's upper atmosphere by NASA's Chandra 
X-ray Observatory. Previous theories cannot explain either the 
pulsations or the location of the hot spot, prompting 
scientists to search for a new process to produce Jupiter's X-
rays.

"The location of the X-ray hot spot effectively retires the 
existing explanation for Jupiter's 
X-ray emission, leaving us very unsure of its origin," said 
Randy Gladstone of the Southwest Research Institute in San 
Antonio and lead author of a paper on the results in the Feb. 
28, 2002, issue of the journal Nature. "The source of ions 
that produce the X-rays must be a lot farther away from 
Jupiter than previously believed."

Chandra observed Jupiter for 10 hours on Dec. 18, 2000, when 
NASA's Cassini spacecraft was flying by Jupiter on its way to 
Saturn. The X-ray observations revealed that most of the 
auroral X-rays come from a pulsating hot spot that appears at 
a fixed location near the north magnetic pole of Jupiter.

Bright infrared and ultraviolet emissions have also been 
detected from this region in the past. The X-rays were 
observed to pulsate with a period of 45 minutes, similar to 
the period of high-latitude radio pulsations detected by 
NASA's Galileo and Cassini spacecraft.

An aurora of X-ray light near Jupiter's polar regions had been 
detected by previous satellites. However, scientists were 
unable to determine the exact location of the X-rays. The 
accepted theory holds that the X-rays are produced by 
energetic oxygen and sulfur ions that became excited as they 
ran into hydrogen and helium in Jupiter's atmosphere. Oxygen 
and sulfur ions (originally from Jupiter's moon Io) are 
energized while circulating around Jupiter's enormous 
magnetosphere. And some -- the purported X-ray producers -- 
get dumped into Jupiter's atmosphere when they return to the 
region of Io's orbit.

Chandra's ability to accurately determine the location of the 
X-rays proved this model incorrect, as ions from regions of 
Jupiter's magnetic field near Io cannot reach the high Jovian 
latitudes where most of the X-rays were observed.

This result has its own problems. At the large distances 
required for the source of the ions --at least 30 times the 
radius of Jupiter -- spacecraft measurements have shown that 
there are not nearly enough energetic oxygen and sulfur ions 
to account for the observed X-ray emission.

One possibility is that heavy ions among the particles flowing 
out from the Sun as the solar wind are captured in the outer 
regions of Jupiter's magnetic field, then accelerated and 
directed toward its magnetic pole. Once captured, the ions 
would bounce back and forth in the magnetic field from pole to 
pole in an oscillating motion that might explain the 
pulsations.

The High Resolution Camera used for the Chandra observations 
was built by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in 
Cambridge, Mass. NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in 
Huntsville, Ala., manages the Chandra program, and TRW, Inc., 
Redondo Beach, Calif., is the prime contractor. The 
Smithsonian's Chandra X-ray Center controls science and flight 
operations from Cambridge, Mass.

Images and additional information about this result are 
available at:

http://chandra.harvard.edu
and
http://chandra.nasa.gov

                          -end-
