Bob Jacobs
Headquarters, Washington        Feb. 12, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1600)

RELEASE: 02-26

NASA ADMINISTRATOR NAMES RETIRED MARINE
GENERAL TO LEAD JOHNSON SPACE CENTER

     NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe today named Jefferson D. 
Howell, Jr., as the new Director for NASA's Johnson Space 
Center (JSC) in Houston, effective April 1.

Howell, a retired U.S. Marine Corps Lieutenant General and 
former commander of Marine Forces, Pacific, currently serves 
as Senior Vice President and Program Manager for the Safety, 
Reliability, and Quality Assurance contract at JSC. He is 
employed by Science Application International Corporation 
(SAIC). 

"General Howell is a true patriot and leader with more than 
three decades of executive management and financial 
management experience," said Administrator O'Keefe. 
"Throughout his military and civilian careers, Jeff has been 
a leader, an innovator and a team builder. He's the right 
person to lead the NASA center that's the cornerstone of our 
human spaceflight operations."

Howell replaces Roy S. Estess, who was temporarily assigned 
to JSC last February as Acting Director. Estess, a native of 
Mississippi, will return to his duties as Director of NASA's 
John C. Stennis Space Center.

"Over the past year, Roy has done a terrific job leading the 
dedicated people at Johnson," Administrator O'Keefe added. 
"He agreed to step in at a difficult and challenging time for 
the agency. His outstanding stewardship and advice played a 
vital role in today's announcement, and I have expressed my 
deep appreciation for his service to JSC and to NASA."

Howell has been with SAIC since February 1999, when he first 
served as Deputy Program Manager of the safety contract. He 
was named Program Manager in August 1999. Howell manages more 
than 525 people in support of a contract focused on safety 
and mission assurance in support of the Space Shuttle and 
International Space Station programs.

He retired from the U.S. Marine Corps in 1998 as Marine 
Forces Pacific Commander, reporting to the four star 
Commander in Chief, Pacific. Howell was responsible for the 
operational readiness, training, equipping and welfare of 
80,000 Marine personnel based throughout the area. In this 
capacity, Howell was also charged with maintaining the 
readiness of more than 600 aircraft and managing an annual 
operational budget of more than one billion dollars.

"Howell's military service is exemplary and he has a legacy 
of organizational and financial expertise," concluded 
Administrator O'Keefe. "I am proud that he has accepted the 
opportunity and responsibility to lead JSC."

Assigned to naval flight training in 1964, Howell earned his 
wings as a Naval Aviator in 1965. He flew more than 300 
combat missions during Vietnam.

In 1995, after numerous commands, he was promoted to 
Lieutenant General and assigned as the Command, Marine Forces 
Pacific/Commanding General Fleet Marine Forces Pacific and 
Commander Marine Corps Bases, Pacific. He was headquartered 
at Camp H.M. Smith, Oahu Hawaii, and designated Commander of 
U.S. Marine Forces Korea and Commander U.S. Marine Forces 
Central Command.

During a distinguished military career, Howell was awarded 
the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Superior 
Service Medal, the Legion of Merit, a Bronze Star, and the 
Air Medal with two individual and 25 strike flight awards, 
and the Navy Commendation Medal. In 1980, he received the John 
Paul Jones Award for Inspirational Leadership from the Navy 
League of the United States.

He earned a bachelor's degree in Political Science and a 
master's degree in Economics at the University of Texas.

                          -end-


