Bob Jacobs
Headquarters, Washington                                  March 18, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1600)

Cheryl Henry/Rhonda Murphy
Universal Studios Florida, Orlando
(Phone: 407/423-8006, 224-5419)

RELEASE: 02-54

SPACE STATION ASTRONAUTS ACCEPT LONG DISTANCE CALL FROM E.T. --
LIVE FROM UNIVERSAL STUDIOS

 Two decades after making his first long-distance call to phone home, the 
adorable alien E.T. uses his odd-looking intergalactic telephone 
tomorrow to contact the Expedition Four crew orbiting Earth on board the 
International Space Station.

It's the first alien-to-astronaut call for the creation of Academy 
Award-winning director Steven Spielberg, who celebrates the 20th 
anniversary of his blockbuster film "E.T., The Extra-Terrestrial" 
Tuesday, March 19, at Universal Studios Florida in Orlando.

Children from surrounding schools get to participate in this unique 
communique and learn about life in space from American astronauts Carl 
Walz and Daniel Bursch. Russian Commander Yury Onufrienko will supervise 
the transmission from inside the orbiting research platform.

"Almost every child dreams of someday becoming an astronaut and 
exploring the stars to see if life exists elsewhere," said NASA 
Administrator Sean O'Keefe. "E.T. took the concept of extraterrestrial 
life and made it a possibility for kids around the world. With Universal 
Studios Florida's cooperation, we have an opportunity to reach students, 
show them the wonder of real space travel and hopefully inspire a new 
generation of explorers."

On the ground, NASA astronaut Janice Voss and Human Space Flight Chief 
Scientist Dr. Kathryn Clark will help answers questions that are more 
down-to-Earth about the importance of a science and mathematics 
education and how research in space impacts everyday life at home. 

The initial call can be seen live on NASA Television between 10:15 a.m. 
and 10:20 a.m. EST. The entire celestial event will be broadcast on NASA 
TV at 3 p.m. EST.

"Universal Studios Florida is honored to partner with NASA to 
commemorate the 20th anniversary of the heart-warming classic film 
'E.T., The Extra-Terrestrial,'" said Bob Gault, President and Chief 
Operating Officer of Universal Studios Florida. "More than 40 million 
visitors have ridden our E.T. Adventure attraction since it opened in 
1990 as the sequel to the feature film, making it a consistent park 
favorite. To celebrate E.T.'s anniversary, we have enhanced this popular 
ride and made it even more spectacular for a new generation of guests."

"E.T., The Extra-Terrestrial," is being re-released and will premiere at 
theaters nationwide on Friday, March 22. First released June 11, 1982, 
this updated sci-fi classic now features updated visual effects, an 
enhanced digital soundtrack and never-before-seen footage. 

The movie about a homesick alien and his connection with his human 
friend Elliott still holds the record for Universal Pictures' highest-
grossing domestic film ever. Worldwide, the movie has earned more than 
$702 million. The film received nine Academy Award nominations, winning 
four Oscars.

The International Space Station is the most complicated and most 
sophisticated project ever undertaken, orbiting our planet 24 hours a 
day, seven days a week, with a three-member crew permanently housed. The 
product of an unprecedented 16-nation cooperative effort, the space 
platform provides an orbital laboratory for long-term research, where 
one of the fundamental forces of nature -- gravity -- is greatly 
reduced. In addition, world-class research in biology, chemistry, 
physics, ecology and medicine can be conducted using the most modern 
tools available. 

NASA TV is available on satellite GE-2, transponder 9C, C-Band. The 
satellite is located at 85 degrees West longitude, frequency is 3880.0 
MHz, polarization is vertical and audio is monaural at 6.8 MHz.

Additional information about the film, Universal Studios Florida's theme 
park, Expedition Four and the International Space Station is available 
on the Internet at:

http://spaceflight.nasa.gov

http://www.et20.com/

http://www.universalorlando.com

-end-

