Dwayne Brown/Kyle Herring
Headquarters, Washington                 Feb. 5, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726/4504)

James Hartsfield
Johnson Space Center, Houston
(Phone: 281/483-5111)

Bruce Buckingham
Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
(Phone: 321/867-2468)

RELEASE: 02-22

KENNEDY SPACE CENTER TO PERFORM SHUTTLE MODIFICATIONS

     After completing detailed, independent cost and risk 
assessments, the agency has decided to perform Space Shuttle 
Orbiter Major Modifications (OMM) at NASA's Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC) in Florida.

Since the inception of the Space Shuttle program, the 
Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California has served as 
the manufacturing site for all orbiters, in addition to the 
primary location for performing periodic maintenance and 
safety upgrades.

However, beginning immediately with the Space Shuttle 
Discovery, which is scheduled for its periodic structural 
inspection and maintenance period in early spring, the work 
will be moved to KSC.

NASA Headquarters' Office of Space Flight made the decision 
following an extensive review. While it was determined that 
either KSC or Palmdale could support the current Space 
Shuttle launch schedule, keeping two modification facilities 
active to support four orbiters is no longer feasible in 
today's fiscal environment. Program managers believe 
significant infrastructure savings would be realized 
performing the major modifications in Florida. Shifting work 
to KSC would also minimize risk.

"This decision reflects NASA's primary goal of maintaining 
safety as its primary objective and then evaluating cost 
savings and risks associated with that decision," NASA 
Administrator Sean O'Keefe said. "It is obvious that in the 
current fiscal environment, it makes more sense to perform 
this work at the launch site for the foreseeable future."

The decision was reached after evaluating site selection 
criteria established by the Office of Space Flight, which 
included cost and risk, manifest impacts, shuttle flight 
schedule, management and workforce skills and experience, 
major modification performance in the past and present, 
facility utilization and centralization of operations.

While both KSC and Palmdale could support the OMM, managers 
determined keeping both active to support four orbiters is no 
longer practical or feasible given the current shuttle 
manifest and budget environment.

                            -end-
