Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington                 March 20, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

Bill Steigerwald
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-5017)

RELEASE: 02-59

NASA CELEBRATES SUN-EARTH DAY 
WITH SOLAR X-RAY FIREWORKS

     Just in time for Sun-Earth Day, a new NASA spacecraft, 
complete with a new name, made its debut by observing a huge 
explosion in the atmosphere of the Sun. The blast, called a 
solar flare, was equal to one million megatons of TNT and 
gave off powerful bursts of X-rays.

The solar fireworks were captured by what is now known as the 
Reuven Ramaty High-Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager 
spacecraft, or RHESSI. The spacecraft launched last month as 
HESSI was recently renamed in honor of Dr. Reuven Ramaty, who 
died in 2001 after a long and distinguished career in the 
Laboratory for High Energy Astrophysics at the NASA Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. Ramaty was a pioneer in 
the field of solar-flare physics, gamma-ray astronomy and 
cosmic rays. 

"We are thrilled to be making the first high-resolution 
movies of flares using their high-energy radiation," said 
Brian Dennis, the RHESSI mission scientist at Goddard. "We 
want to understand how solar flares can explosively release 
so much energy. RHESSI shows us the high-energy radiation 
emitted by flares: their X-rays and gamma rays. This 
radiation reveals the core of the flare -- the exact time and 
place where the energy is released."

Today is the second annual Sun-Earth Day, which is sponsored 
by NASA's Sun-Earth Connection Education Forum to provide an 
opportunity to learn more about the Sun's connection to the 
Earth through images, cultural parallels and activities. 
Powerful events on the Sun, including flares, occasionally 
disrupt satellites and communications and power systems.

Scientists believe solar flares are powered by the violent 
release of magnetic energy, but how this happens is unknown. 
A new movie features one of the first flares recorded by 
RHESSI, which occurred Feb. 20 in the southern hemisphere of 
the Sun, an active region designated "AR 9830." 

It was a moderately powerful flare, classified as M2.4 by the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 
most powerful flares, designated X-class by NOAA, can release 
up to 1,000 times more energy.
 
During its planned two-year mission, RHESSI will study the 
secrets of how solar flares are produced in the Sun's 
atmosphere. Launched Feb. 5, RHESSI is now fully operational 
after only six weeks in orbit. It is observing the Sun and 
recording the high-energy radiation from solar flares as they 
occur.

RHESSI is the first NASA Small Explorer mission being managed 
in the "Principal Investigator" mode. The Principal 
Investigator, Robert Lin of the University of California, 
Berkeley, is responsible for most aspects of the mission, 
including the science instrument, spacecraft integration and 
environmental testing, and spacecraft operations and data 
analysis.

The RHESSI scientific payload is a collaborative effort among 
the University of California, Berkeley; Goddard; the Paul 
Scherrer Institut in Switzerland; and the Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory in Berkeley. The mission also involves 
additional scientific participation from France, Japan, The 
Netherlands, Scotland and Switzerland.

The Explorers Program Office at Goddard manages the RHESSI 
mission for NASA's Office of Space Science in Washington. 
Spectrum Astro, Inc. of Gilbert, Ariz., constructed the 
RHESSI spacecraft and provided integration support.

A movie of the flare recorded by the RHESSI spacecraft is 
available on the Internet at:
http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/20020320hessixray.html

RHESSI data are now available online to the general public 
at:
http://hesperia.gsfc.nasa.gov/hessi/

More information about Sun-Earth Day can be found on the 
World Wide Web at:
http://sunearth.gsfc.nasa.gov.sunearthday

                               -end-
