David E. Steitz
Headquarters, Washington                 Jan. 18, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1730)

RELEASE: 02-12

TECHNOLOGY MISSION ACCOMPLISHED, NASA GOES FOR MORE

     The mission was to validate nine new breakthrough 
technologies in the unique environment of space -- 
technologies that will change the way spacecraft and Earth-
viewing instruments are built and operated in the future. 
After a fully successful series of experiments and tests, 
NASA's going for more.

The Earth Observing-1 technology-testbed spacecraft was 
launched just over a year ago to see how a set of advanced 
technologies would fare in the actual space environment -- 
the final step in validating these new concepts. The 
instruments -- ranging from a hyperspectral imager (a 
"camera" that views the Earth's surface with spectral 
discrimination never before seen) to an X-Band Phased Array 
Antenna that sends high volumes of data back to Earth in a 
unique "pencil beam" pattern -- all met test objectives with 
"flying colors." 

A pulsed plasma thruster was tested as a new way of 
controlling spacecraft attitude and "pointability," and an 
Advanced Land Imager validated a new low-cost way of 
providing Landsat-type or better views of Earth from space 
with more desirable size, mass and power and improved 
performance. 

Breakthroughs in carbon composite-structure technologies to 
keep spacecraft lightweight and cool, and an advanced, 
wideband recorder processor were tested and found fit for use 
in future flights. A new lightweight, flexible solar array 
also proved a success.

Now that the mission has met all objectives within the one-
year on-orbit goal, mission scientists and the user community 
want to keep things going. To accommodate user needs, NASA 
has formed a partnership with the United States Geological 
Survey (USGS) in Reston, Va., to continue the mission through 
the acquisition and provision of mission data based on user 
requests.

The EO-1 Extended Mission partnership is modeled on the 
successful NASA/USGS Landsat data-purchase model, and 
parallels NASA's policy of charging for use of unique NASA 
capabilities. EO-1 is one-of-a-kind and no equivalent 
commercial source exists; the private sector is part of the 
user community that has requested continuing mission 
operations.

Under the extended mission agreement, NASA will continue to 
command and control EO-1, while USGS will take researchers' 
cost-reimbursable orders for spacecraft data. EO-1 price 
levels have been set to recover satellite operation, data 
processing and customer interface costs, estimated at 
approximately $5 million per year.

NASA and USGS believe that data from EO-1 may be valuable in 
global land-cover studies, ecosystem monitoring, mineral and 
petroleum prospecting, and agricultural crop discrimination 
and assessment, among other potential applications. The 
extended mission will allow a broad range of users to 
experiment and learn from these advanced capabilities. It 
also provides an ideal mechanism for technology transfer to 
the private sector.

Potential customers for these data include the existing 31 
science teams who have been supporting the mission. The 
satellite-manufacturing industry; the value-added commercial 
remote-sensing community; the Earth Sciences research 
community; and federal, state and local agencies, as well as 
a variety of national security organizations, all may find 
potential use for the new, experimental data unique to EO-1. 

NASA and USGS will review EO-1 operations on a monthly basis. 
Depending on the demand for EO-1-unique observations and 
spacecraft health, satellite decommissioning could occur as 
early as this spring or as late as the spring of 2005.

The EO-1 mission is part of the advanced technologies 
research conducted by NASA's Earth Science Enterprise, a 
long-term research effort dedicated to understanding how 
human-induced and natural changes affect our global 
environment.

Data inquiries and orders from USGS can be handled online at:

http://eo1.usgs.gov

A description of the EO-1 satellite and sensors is available 
at:

http://eo1.gsfc.nasa.gov 

                             -end-
