David E. Steitz
Headquarters, Washington            March 4, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1730)

John Bluck
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
(Phone: 650/604-5026)

Robert Gutro
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-4044)

RELEASE: 02-37

FUTURE VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS MAY CAUSE OZONE HOLE OVER ARCTIC

     An "ozone hole" could form over the North Pole after 
future major volcanic eruptions, according to the cover story 
by a NASA scientist in tomorrow's edition of the Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences.

Since the 1980s a seasonal ozone hole, characterized by 
severe loss of ozone, has appeared over the continent of 
Antarctica. However, scientists have not yet observed, on an 
annual basis, as severe a thinning of the protective ozone 
layer in the atmosphere over the Arctic. The ozone layer 
shields life on Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. A 
northern ozone hole could be significant since more people 
live in Arctic regions than near the South Pole.

"A 'volcanic ozone hole' is likely to occur over the Arctic 
within the next 30 years," said Azadeh Tabazadeh, lead author 
of the paper and a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, 
Moffett Field, Calif. Her co-authors are: Katja Drdla, also 
of Ames; Mark R. Schoeberl of NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center, Greenbelt, Md.; Patrick Hamill of San Jose State 
University, Calif.; and O. Brian Toon from the University of 
Colorado, Boulder. 

"If a period of high volcanic activity coincides with a 
series of cold Arctic winters, then a springtime Arctic ozone 
hole may reappear for a number of consecutive years, 
resembling the pattern seen in the Antarctic every spring 
since the 1980s," Tabazadeh said.

"Unlike the Antarctic where it is cold every winter, the 
winter in the Arctic stratosphere is highly variable," 
Tabazadeh said. NASA satellite and airborne observations show 
that significant Arctic ozone loss occurs only following very 
cold winters, according to Tabazadeh.

 Large volcanic eruptions pump sulfur compounds into the 
Earth's atmosphere. These compounds form sulfuric acid clouds 
similar to polar stratospheric clouds made of nitric acid and 
water. The clouds of nitric acid and water form in the upper 
atmosphere during very cold conditions and play a major part 
in the destruction of ozone over Earth's poles. Following 
eruptions, volcanic sulfuric acid clouds would greatly add to 
the ozone-destroying power of polar stratospheric clouds, 
researchers said. 

"Volcanic aerosols also can cause ozone destruction at warmer 
temperatures than polar stratospheric clouds, and this would 
expand the area of ozone destruction over more populated 
areas," Tabazadeh said. "Nearly one-third of the total ozone 
depletion could be a result of volcanic aerosol effects at 
altitudes below about 17 kilometers (11.5 miles)," said the 
researchers.

"Volcanic emissions can spread worldwide," said Schoeberl. 
"Our Mt. Pinatubo computer simulation shows that the volcanic 
plume spread as far north as the North Pole in the lowest 
part of the stratosphere within a few months after the 
eruption."

Between about 15 and 25 kilometers (9 to 16 miles) in 
altitude, volcanic Arctic clouds could increase springtime 
ozone loss over the Arctic by as much as 70 percent, 
according to Drdla. "The combination of thick volcanic 
aerosols at lower altitudes and natural polar stratospheric 
clouds at higher altitudes could greatly increase the 
potential for ozone destruction over the North Pole in a cold 
year," Tabazadeh said.

"Both the 1982 El Chichon and 1991 Mt. Pinatubo eruptions 
were sulfur-rich, producing volcanic clouds that lasted a 
number of years in the stratosphere," Tabazadeh said. The 
Pinatubo eruption, as observed by NASA spacecraft, widely 
expanded the area of ozone loss over the Arctic. 

Both of these eruptions did have an effect, however, over the 
South Pole, expanding the area and the depth of the ozone 
hole over the Antarctic, according to Tabazadeh. Computer 
simulations have shown that the early and rapid growth of the 
Antarctic ozone hole in the early 1980s may have been 
influenced in part by a number of large volcanic eruptions, 
she added.

"In 1993 the Arctic winter was not one of the coldest winters 
on record, and yet the ozone loss was one of the greatest 
that we've seen," Tabazadeh said. "This was due to the 
sulfurous Pinatubo clouds facilitating the destruction of 
additional ozone at lower altitudes where polar stratospheric 
clouds cannot form."

"Climate change combined with aftereffects of large volcanic 
eruptions will contribute to more ozone loss over both 
poles," Tabazadeh said. "This research proves that ozone 
recovery is more complex than originally thought." 
                           -end-
More information is available at: 
 http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/20020304volcano.html
