Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington                   March 15, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

Carolina Martinez
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
(Phone: 818/354-9382)

RELEASE: 02-53

NASA SELECTS ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY CONCEPT FOR TEST FLIGHT

     NASA's New Millennium Program has selected two 
organizations to lead the work on sensor and thrust-producing 
technologies to control a space vehicle's flight path so the 
payload responds only to gravitational forces.

The Disturbance Reduction System technology is scheduled to 
fly in 2006 as the Space Technology 7 project. Space 
Technology 7 is designed to test and validate advanced 
technologies for future use on NASA missions that have never 
been flown in space. 

The total NASA funding for Space Technology 7 is $62.6 
million. The technology providers are Stanford University, 
Stanford, Calif., and Busek Company Inc., Natick, Mass. 
Stanford University will provide a highly sensitive 
gravitational reference sensor that will measure the position 
of a spacecraft with respect to an internal free-floating 
mass. The Busek Company will provide a set of miniature ion 
thrusters capable of controlling spacecraft position with 
extremely fine precision. 

"The Disturbance Reduction System is a promising new 
technology that will pave the way for future space 
observations of gravitational waves, giving us a whole new 
eye on the universe," said Anne Kinney, Director of the 
Astronomy and Physics Division, Office of Space Science, NASA 
Headquarters. 

The New Millennium Program was created in 1994 to identify, 
develop and flight-validate advanced technologies that can 
lower costs and enable critical performance of science 
missions in the 21st century. The program is managed by the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., for NASA's 
Office of Earth Science and Office of Space Science, 
Washington, D.C. JPL is a division of the California 
Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

More information on New Millennium is available at:  
http://nmp.jpl.nasa.gov
                          -end-
