Dwayne Brown
Headquarters, Washington              March 13, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726)

Steve Roy
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
(Phone: 256/544-0034)

RELEASE: 02-50

SPACE-GREENHOUSE TECHNOLOGY RE-UPS FOR FIGHT AGAINST 
BIOTERRORISM

     Building miniature greenhouses for experiments on the 
International Space Station has led to the invention of a 
device that can destroy Anthrax -- a bacteria that can be 
deadly when inhaled.

The Anthrax-killing air scrubber, called AiroCideTiO2 
(titanium dioxide), is a tabletop-size metal box that bolts to 
office ceilings or walls.  Its fans draw in airborne spores 
and airflow forces them through a maze of tubes. Inside, 
hydroxyl radicals attack and kill pathogens. Most remaining 
spores are destroyed by high-energy ultraviolet photons.

The technology to build the device emerged from another 
product called Bio-KES, which today is used by grocers and 
florists to remove ethylene and thus extend the life of 
vegetables, fruits and flowers. Ethylene is a gas released by 
the leaves of growing plants -- but too much of it can build 
up in an enclosed plant-growth chamber or produce storage 
facility.  

Too much ethylene causes plants to mature too quickly and 
fruit to ripen prematurely; it even accelerates decay. This 
hinders researchers' efforts to harvest healthy plants grown 
in space and would also be undesirable when space travelers 
build larger space-based greenhouses for growing fresh food.

The research that led to the invention of Bio-KES started with 
a crucial discovery made in the early 90s by scientists at the 
Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and Robotics - a NASA 
Commercial Space Center at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. These scientists collaborated on the discovery with 
Dr. Marc Anderson, a professor and chemist also at the 
university.

The research team found that ultra-thin layers of titanium 
dioxide exposed to ultraviolet light converted ethylene into 
carbon dioxide and water -- substances that are good for 
plants. Subsequently, they developed a coating technology that 
applies titanium-dioxide layers to the surfaces of many 
materials.

The Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and Robotics used 
the titanium-dioxide coating technology to design an ethylene 
scrubber. This first-generation ethylene scrubber was used 
effectively inside a plant-growth unit, which grew potato 
plants during a space shuttle mission in 1995. Over the years, 
scientists refined the ethylene scrubber, and currently the 
third-generation scrubber is being used successfully inside 
for plant experiments on the International Space Station.  

"Space-based greenhouses may seem to have little to do with 
the war against terrorism," said Mark Nall, director of the 
Space Product Development Program at NASA's Marshall Space 
Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala.  "Yet this invention shows 
how commercial space research can benefit people on Earth in 
unexpected ways."   

KES Science and Technology, Kennesaw, Ga., licensed the TiO2 
coating technology from the University of Wisconsin, which 
allowed them to develop the Bio-KES ethylene scrubber and the 
Anthrax-killing scrubber for use on Earth. When the 
ultraviolet light strikes the titanium-dioxide tubes inside 
the devices, it creates positive and negative electrical 
charges. These charges tear apart nearby water molecules and 
produce hydroxyl radicals. 

"This hydroxyl by-product disrupts organic molecules and is 
thus deadly to dust mites, Anthrax and many other pathogens," 
said John Hayman, president of KES Science and Technology, the 
company that manufactures the devices. "We put higher-powered 
ultraviolet lamps in the Anthrax-killing device, so more 
hydroxyl radicals are produced, giving it an extra kick."

More information on space station experiments and science 
operations is available at:

http://www.scipoc.msfc.nasa.gov/
http://spaceresearch.nasa.gov

                           -end-
