





Jim Cast
Headquarters, Washington                                  Feb. 15, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1779)

Cynthia O'Carroll
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/614-5563)

RELEASE: 02-28

SNOW SCIENCE, NOT SPORT, IN THE ROCKIES

 This month, dozens of scientists on the ground, in the air and using 
satellite observations will begin a multi-year experiment to study 
winter snow packs on the Colorado side of the Rocky Mountains. The 
purpose of this NASA-funded experiment is to improve the estimation of 
snow amount and forecasting of spring flooding due to snowmelt, and to 
study the role of cold lands within the Earth's climate.

Scientists and students from six federal agencies and many universities 
will be using skis, snowmobiles and aircraft to survey and sample snow 
during this NASA Cold Land Processes Experiment (CLPX). They will also 
use microwave measurements from satellites and aircraft to measure 
characteristics of the snow pack and the freeze/thaw state of the land 
surface.

The CLPX is a research mission concerned with frozen landscapes, where 
water is frozen either seasonally or permanently because of water 
stored in snow and ice cover. Cold land regions form an important 
component of the Earth's hydrologic cycle, and interact significantly 
with water resources, global weather and climate.

Teams of scientists and technicians from three NASA facilities -- the 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.; Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
Pasadena, Calif.; and Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. -- 
will take part in this campaign. They will join scientists from the 
NOAA/National Weather Service's National Operational Hydrologic Remote 
Sensing Center (NWS/NOHRSC), the U.S. Department of Agriculture's 
Forest Service, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Cold Region Research 
and Engineering Lab, the U.S. Geological Survey, the USDA Agricultural 
Research Service and graduate students from universities around the 
world.

"We will be making intensive measurements of snow in Colorado's 
mountains and high-elevation rangelands, including digging hundreds of 
snow pits to analyze snow water content, temperature and crystal 
formation at different depths," explained Don Cline, a scientist with 
the NWS/NOHRSC who leads the CLPX. "We'll use this information to 
better understand the formation and evolution of snow packs, especially 
the processes and timing of snowmelt. Observing the transitions in 
snow, water and energy in such frozen landscapes will ultimately help 
us design better sensors to measure the water content of snow from 
space."

Michael Jasinski, former manager of NASA's Terrestrial Hydrology 
Program at NASA Headquarters, Washington, said, "The overall CLPX 
objectives stem directly from NASA's Earth Science Enterprise Research 
Strategy to address hydrologic variability and consequences of climate 
and terrestrial change. Our ultimate goal is to improve prediction of 
the hydrologic cycle and management of our nation's water resources."

The CLPX field campaign will employ two aircraft and measurements from 
NASA's Terra and Aqua satellites to gather snow data by remote sensing. 
The data gathered on the ground and from the aircraft will then be 
compared to the information obtained by the satellites. Aqua is being 
launched this year and will be operational for the 2003 campaign. By 
determining the accuracy of the satellites and developing improved snow 
sensors, researchers hope to someday be able to measure snow quantity 
and frozen ground from space for the global views needed by forecast 
models.

Dryden Flight Research Center will be flying its DC-8 "Airborne 
Laboratory" with a variety of microwave imaging and other sensors. The 
NWS/NOHRSC Airborne Snow Survey Program will also be flying similar 
snow detection sensors on a NOAA aircraft. The experiment will be 
conducted in the central Rocky Mountains where there is a wide array of 
different terrain, snow, soil and ecological characteristics. 
Background data collection for the experiment began in the fall of 
2001. The first field campaign runs from February 19 to 25, to capture 
cold land properties during mid-winter, and March 24 to 30, 2002, to 
observe the same areas when the snow and ice begin to melt. This 
schedule will then be repeated in 2003.

The mission is sponsored by the NASA Terrestrial Hydrology Program and 
the Earth Observing System Program to address broad NASA Earth Science 
Enterprise objectives in hydrology, water resources, ecology and 
atmospheric sciences.

More information is available on the Internet at: 

http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/20020216coldland.html
http://www.nohrsc.nws.gov/~cline/clp.html
http://lshp.gsfc.nasa.gov
http://www.crrel.usace.army.mil

-end-
