Don Savage
Headquarters, Washington                              Jan. 8, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1547)

Nancy Neal
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-0039)

Ray Villard
Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore
(Phone: 410/338-4514)

RELEASE: 02-01

HUBBLE SUGGESTS FIRST STARS OPENED IN A BLAZE OF GLORY

     The deepest views of the cosmos from NASA's Hubble Space 
Telescope yield clues that the very first stars may have burst 
into the universe as brilliantly and spectacularly as a fireworks 
finale. In this case though the finale came first, long before 
Earth, the Sun and the Milky Way Galaxy formed.

If this interpretation is correct, it offers a tantalizing 
possibility that astronomers may behold this stellar blaze of 
glory when they use NASA's Next Generation Space Telescope and 
other future space telescopes to probe even farther into the very 
early universe. 

Studies of Hubble's deepest views of the heavens by Kenneth M. 
Lanzetta of the State University of New York at Stony Brook and 
colleagues lead to the preliminary conclusion that the universe 
made a significant portion of its stars in a torrential firestorm 
of star birth, which abruptly lit up the pitch-dark heavens just a 
few hundred million years after the big bang. Though stars 
continue to be born today in galaxies, the star birthrate could be 
a trickle compared to the predicted gusher of stars in those 
opulent early years.

This new idea of a continually escalating rate of star birth the 
farther Hubble looks back in time offers a dramatic revision of 
previous Hubble Deep Field studies that proposed that the star 
birthrate in the early universe ramped up to a "baby boom" about 
halfway back to the beginning of the universe.

"If this can be verified it will dramatically change our 
understanding of the universe," said Dr. Anne Kinney, director of 
the Astronomy and Physics division at NASA Headquarters, 
Washington. "Because stars are the building blocks of galaxies and 
the birthplace of solar systems, proving that countless numbers of 
stars began forming so early after the birth of the universe could 
cause us to rethink a lot of our theories."

Lanzetta bases his conclusion on a new analysis of galaxies in the 
Hubble deep fields taken near the north and south celestial poles 
(in 1995 and 1998 respectively). He reports in an upcoming issue 
of the Astrophysical Journal that the farthest objects in the deep 
fields are only the "tip of the iceberg" of an effervescent period 
of star birth that is unlike anything the universe will ever see 
again. Lanzetta concludes that 90 percent of the light from the 
early universe is missing in the Hubble deep fields. "The previous 
census of the deep fields missed most of the ultraviolet light in 
the universe; most of it is invisible," he says.

Based on an analysis of galaxy colors, Lanzetta concludes that the 
farthest objects in the deep fields must be extremely intense, 
unexpectedly bright knots of blue-white, hot newborn stars 
embedded in primordial galaxies that are too faint to be seen even 
by Hubble's far vision. It's like seeing only the lights on a 
distant Christmas tree and inferring the presence of the whole 
tree.

Likewise, Lanzetta deduced the total population of stars in the 
early universe based on observing only the brightest stars with 
the Hubble telescope. Because such far extrapolations are built on 
certain assumptions, this conclusion will require further analysis 
and observation. 

Lanzetta next plans to use Hubble's Advanced Camera for Surveys, 
to be installed in early 2002, to look even deeper into the 
universe to try to directly verify some portion of the missing 
light. He will also look for very distant supernovae as an 
alternate measure of star formation. "Because they are point 
sources of light, supernovae are not subject to the same 
cosmological brightness-dimming effects like galaxies (which are 
extended sources of light)," says Lanzetta.

The Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc. 
operates the Space Telescope Science Institute for NASA, under 
contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. The 
Hubble Space Telescope is a project of international co-operation 
between NASA and the European Space Agency.

Additional information is available on the Internet at:

             http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/pr/2002/02

                    http://hubble.stsci.edu/go/news

           http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/latest.html

          http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/pictures.html


                               -end-

