Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington               April 4, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

Nancy Neal
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/286-0039)

RELEASE: 02-63

PARTIAL LAUNCH VEHICLE AND SPACECRAFT 
TO RE-ENTER EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE

     The upper stage of a Pegasus launch vehicle with NASA's 
first High Energy Transient Experiment (HETE-1) and the 
Argentine SAC-B spacecraft still attached is predicted to re-
enter the Earth's atmosphere at approximately 7 a.m. EDT 
Sunday, April 7. This prediction is uncertain to within plus 
or minus two days.

The total weight of the upper stage and combined spacecraft 
is 535 kilograms (1,177 pounds). Initial analysis indicates 
that only four small stainless-steel batteries, weighing a 
total of 15 kilograms (33 pounds) will survive re-entry.

"The re-entry is uncontrolled, and due to potential solar 
flux variations, time and location predictions will not be 
reliable until only a few hours before the re-entry event," 
said Scott Hull, Spacecraft Engineering Lead for Space 
Systems Mission Operations at NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center, Greenbelt, Md. 

The U.S. Space Command will track HETE-1/SAC-B and the 
launch-vehicle third stage until re-entry. NASA will monitor 
the orbital parameters based on Space Command data and will 
supply updates and technical information as needed.

The HETE-1 satellite was launched Nov. 4, 1996, along with 
SAC-B, on a Pegasus rocket from Wallops Island, Va. The 
Pegasus rocket achieved a good orbit, but the third stage 
failed to release the two satellites. As a result, SAC-B and 
HETE-1 were unable to function as designed and both died due 
to power failure within days of launch.

SAC-B is connected to a Dual Payload Attach Fitting canister 
containing HETE, which is in turn connected to the Pegasus 
third stage. The combined stack is just over three and a half 
meters (11.6 feet) long with a diameter of one meter (3.3 
feet).

The HETE mission was rebuilt and re-flown as HETE-2, with a 
successful Pegasus launch Oct. 9, 2000.

Updated information on the re-entry will be available on the 
Internet at:

http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/20020401hetereenter.html

                           -end-

