Sonja Alexander
Headquarters, Washington                         May 7, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1761)

Daniel Dowds
QEM Network, Washington
(Phone: 202/659-1818)

RELEASE: 02-83

NASA PROGRAM OFFERS STUDENTS HANDS-ON RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

     For eight weeks this summer, 150 high school students 
from the across the country will have the opportunity to 
become part of campus- and industry-based teams conducting 
research related to NASA's mission. 

The students were selected from among more than 700 
applicants to the 2002 NASA Summer High School Apprenticeship 
Research program, known as SHARP PLUS. The selected 
apprentices represent 119 high schools in 35 states, Guam, 
Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

The Sharp Plus Program, initiated in 1993, is a major 
strategy to increase, strengthen and diversify the nation's 
future pool of mathematics, science, engineering and 
technology majors and professionals. 

Although SHARP PLUS apprentices have excelled in mathematics 
and science courses, most have not had the opportunity to 
apply this knowledge in a true research environment. To 
provide this experience, the program links students to 
professional research scientists and engineers in university 
and industry settings.

"NASA's vision of addressing the shortages of U.S. scientists 
and engineers that threaten our economy is the focus of this 
unique program," said Deborah Glasco, Program Manager, 
Education Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington. 

"By motivating students to pursue careers in science, 
mathematics, technology, engineering and geography through 
interaction with experienced researchers, we are developing a 
new generation of science and technology leaders to expand 
the frontiers of air and space," Glasco explained.

The students conduct research under the guidance of 
professional mentors and gain better understanding of the 
discipline, responsibility and enjoyment associated with 
scientific research. Apprentices prepare papers on their 
research and formally present their findings at the 
conclusion of the program.

"SHARP PLUS sets high expectations for academic achievement 
and seeks to increase the participation and success rate of 
talented students from groups underrepresented in challenging 
mathematics and science courses at the pre-college level," 
said Shirley McBay, President, Quality Education for 
Minorities (QEM) Network, Washington, and SHARP PLUS Program 
Director.

In addition to research, the apprentices participate in a 
wide variety of enrichment activities organized by the host 
universities. These activities range from information 
sessions on mathematics, science and engineering careers, to 
test-taking and computer skills workshops, to an overview of 
college admissions and financial aid procedures.

SHARP PLUS is administered for NASA by QEM Network, a 
nonprofit educational organization, in collaboration with 
universities across the country. The 2002 program runs from 
June 10 through August 2.

More information on the program including a list of students 
selected and host universities is available at: 

http://qemnetwork.qem.org/sharpplus.html

                           -end-

