Sarah Keegan
Headquarters, Washington               Feb. 8, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1902)

RELEASE: 02-25

U.S. CENTENNIAL OF FLIGHT COMMISSION ANNOUNCES OFFICIAL 
PARTNERS

     As the 100th anniversary of the Wright brothers' first 
flight approaches, organizations across the country are 
preparing to take part in the national celebration, 
"Centennial of Flight: Born of Dreams -- Inspired by 
Freedom." The U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission, which is 
coordinating the celebration, has announced that seven 
organizations, listed below with their Web site addresses, 
have been designated official partners of the Commission.

"Centennial partners have a huge impact on the success and 
outcome of the Centennial celebration," Gen. J.R. "Jack" 
Dailey, Chairman of the Commission, said. "These 
organizations have been given partnership status because 
they have proven that their events and materials are 
exceptionally relevant to the centennial of powered flight 
or the history of aviation and also have a strong 
educational focus. Everyone has similar goals and 
objectives; by working together we will only make the 
celebration stronger."

*  AIAA's Evolution of Flight Campaign is designed to mark 
the 100th anniversary of powered flight; recognize the 
achievements of men and women who challenged history; and 
lay the groundwork for the next 100 years of innovation in 
aviation and space technology. The AIAA will honor 
individuals in aerospace history, encourage new talent in 
the sciences to ignite innovation in the aerospace 
industries and bring the leaders of the community together 
to shape a common vision for the future. Highlights of the 
campaign include: The International Air and Space Symposium 
and Exposition. The Next 100 Years. in Dayton, Ohio; 1903 
Wright Flyer Tour and Exposition; Class of 2003 Ambassadors; 
graduate awards/student scholarships; student branch 
activities; and a lecture series. http://www.flight100.org/

*  Aviation Week's "The Next Century of Flight" is dedicated 
to helping the global aerospace industry capitalize on the 
100th anniversary of powered flight and position itself for 
generations to come. Since it was launched in 1998, "The 
Next Century of Flight" has connected with millions of 
professionals and enthusiasts around the world via original 
Aviation Week articles and essays, curriculum support for 
students and teachers, and related partner programs, all 
promoted by an integrated event and media marketing 
campaign. http://www.aviationnow.com/NextCentury

*  Aviation World's Fair 2003 will be a celebration that 
embraces all nations and all aspects of aviation. The Fair, 
which will be held April 7-27, 2003, in Newport News, Va., 
will gather together the global aerospace community to 
present the complete picture of aviation, promote the unique 
contributions aviation has made to society, and educate and 
inspire the next generation of aerospace industry and 
aviation leaders. The event will be both a time capsule of 
the past 100 years and a window through which to view the 
future of aviation. http://www.awf2003.com/

*  EAA's centennial celebration, "Countdown to Kitty Hawk 
presented by Ford Motor Company," includes a series of 
activities to mark the 100th anniversary of the Wright 
brothers' achievement. The centerpiece of the celebration 
and a highlight of the Centennial events will be the flight 
of EAA's 1903 Wright Flyer reproduction -- the only accurate 
flying reproduction of the original -- at Kill Devil Hills, 
N.C., on Dec. 17, 2003, 100 years to the minute after that 
remarkable first flight. Tom Poberezny, president and CEO of 
EAA, is a Centennial of Flight Commissioner and a nationally 
recognized authority on significant contributions to 
aviation and the 1903 Wright Flyer. 
http://www.countdowntokittyhawk.org/

*  The First Flight Centennial Commission is charged with 
developing and planning activities to commemorate the 
centennial of the first flight in North Carolina with 
Centennial partners nationwide. The Commission's programs 
include public awareness, education and special events. 
Activities in 2003 include: events at Wright Brothers 
National Memorial December 13-17; Fayetteville Festival of 
Flight May 16-26; World Flight 2003 invitational fly-in for 
pilots; First Flight Symphony; North Carolina Class of 2003; 
and legacy projects in the visual and performing arts at the 
Outer Banks and across the state.  
http://www.firstflightnc.com/

*  The First Flight Centennial Foundation is located in 
North Carolina. The Foundation's objectives include 
improving Wright Brothers National Memorial, helping to 
produce the First Flight Centennial event on site in 
December 2003, and sharing the story of the Wright brothers 
and their achievements through specific events and 
activities. The Foundation, which is a fundraising partner 
of the National Park Service, has several major projects 
planned, including: the construction of a semi-permanent 
centennial pavilion at the Wright Brothers National 
Memorial, a gala series and capital improvements to the 
Wright Memorial. Dick Howard, president of the Foundation, 
is a Centennial of Flight Commissioner. 
http://www.firstflightcentennial.org/

*  Inventing Flight: Dayton 2003 is charged with promoting 
aviation, the Wright brothers, and the role of Ohio in the 
birth and future of flight. The height of activities in 
Dayton will occur July 3-20, 2003, when Deeds Park, a 12-
acre site near downtown Dayton, will be transformed into 
Celebration Central. Other activities will include: a hot-
air balloon race, Dayton Air Show, International Airship 
Meet, National Aviation Hall of Fame Ceremonies, 
commissioned symphonic works, photography exhibits, 
Inventing Flight Class of 2003, curriculum and choreographed 
dance works. J. Bradford Tillson, chairman of Inventing 
Flight: Dayton 2003, is a Centennial of Flight Commissioner. 
http://www.inventingflight.com/

More information on the Commission can be found at: 
http://www.centennialofflight.gov
                          -end-
