Dwayne Brown/Bob Jacobs
Headquarters, Washington            Feb. 26, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726/1760)

RELEASE: 02-38

SEN. JOHN GLENN AMONG NEW 
NASA ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS

     A space pioneer and a former Secretary of the Navy are 
among the six new, distinguished members of the NASA Advisory 
Council (NAC).

Former U.S. Senator, and veteran Mercury and Space Shuttle 
astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. has agreed to serve on the panel 
that provides advice and counsel to the NASA Administrator. 
Sen. Glenn, who just last week celebrated the 40th 
anniversary of his historic orbital space flight, will attend 
the NAC's next meeting, which convened today at NASA's 
Johnson Space Center in Houston.

"I am delighted Senator Glenn has accepted this 
responsibility and I look forward to his contribution to this 
vital advisory council," said NASA Administrator Sean 
O'Keefe. "His impeccable credentials as an aviator and space 
explorer, and his untiring dedication to the betterment of 
this agency are valuable assets."

Richard Danzig, who served as the 71st Secretary of the Navy 
from 1998 to 2001, also has agreed to join the NAC. Danzig is 
currently director of the National Semiconductor Corporation, 
Santa Clara, Calif., and of Human Genome Sciences, Rockville, 
Md. 

He was also the Undersecretary of the Navy from 1993 to 1997. 
In 1981, he was awarded the Defense Distinguished Public 
Service Award. He received the same honor, which is the 
highest Department of Defense civilian award, in 1997 and 
2001 for his work with the Navy and U.S. Marine Corps.

Also joining the council are other professionals from 
academia and industry, among them Roger E. Tetrault, a 
retired vice chairman and chief executive officer of 
McDermott International, Inc., New Orleans. He retired in 
August 2000 after 24 years of service. A graduate of the U.S. 
Naval Academy and former naval officer, Tetrault also served 
as corporate vice president and president of General 
Dynamics' Electric Boat Division.

Dr. Donald C. Fraser, founder and director of the Photonics 
Center at Boston University, also joins the NAC. Photonics' 
mission is the creation of companies that exploit the 
technology of light. Before joining Boston University, he 
served the George H. Bush administration as the Principal 
Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition.

Joining the panel as well is David J. Berteau, who serves as 
Director of National Security Studies at Syracuse 
University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public 
Affairs, the U.S. Department of Defense Executive Management 
Development and Training Program, in New York.

The final new NAC member is Dr. Andrew Christensen, who 
chairs the Space Sciences Advisory Committee and is currently 
in-house representative to the European Meteorological 
Satellite Organization for the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

"NASA has a long tradition of turning to the best and 
brightest citizens for advice and guidance on major issues," 
added Administrator O'Keefe. "I look forward to a productive 
and meaningful relationship with all the members of the NASA 
Advisory Council."

Each NAC member serves a two-year term, with an option to 
serve an additional two years. The advisory panel meets at 
least four times a year and reports directly to the NASA 
Administrator on critical issues facing the agency.

Dr. Charles F. Kennel, Vice Chancellor of Marine Sciences, 
Director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and Dean 
of the Graduate School of Marine Sciences currently chairs 
the NAC. He is a physicist whose personal research focused on 
fundamental plasma physics, combined with space and 
astrophysics.

Additional information on the NASA Advisory Council is 
available on the Internet at:

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/codez/new/advback.html

                             -end-

