Donald Savage
Headquarters, Washington                    Jan. 15, 2002
(Phone:  202/358-1727)

Guy Webster
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
(Phone:  818/354-5011)

RELEASE:  02-10

FAREWELL, IO; GALILEO PAYING LAST VISIT TO A RESTLESS MOON

     NASA's Galileo orbiter will dart past Jupiter's moon Io 
on Thursday in the veteran spacecraft's last and closest flyby 
of any of the giant planet's four major moons.

Io's volcanoes have presented many surprises since they were 
first seen in 1979 by NASA's Voyager spacecraft and especially 
during the six years that Galileo has been orbiting Jupiter. 
Scientists hope this week's encounter will reveal how several 
regions of Io have changed over the years.

"Galileo's days are numbered now, so it's especially exciting 
to visit Io one last time," said Dr. Eilene Theilig, Galileo 
project manager at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), 
Pasadena, Calif. "An orbital mission like Galileo gives you 
the advantage of getting to examine interesting places 
repeatedly over a period of time.  That's been great for 
studying Io, since it keeps changing so much."

The Galileo flight team at JPL aimed the orbiter to skim just 
100 kilometers (62 miles) above Io's multicolored surface at 
9:09 a.m. EST on Jan. 17. "The reason we're going so close is 
to put Galileo on a ballistic trajectory for impact into 
Jupiter in September 2003," Theilig said.

Galileo has operated in orbit more than three times longer 
than its originally planned mission. The resilient spacecraft 
has survived about three and a half times as much exposure to 
radiation from Jupiter's radiation belts as it was designed to 
withstand. In its 33 loops around Jupiter, it has flown near 
Io six times previously and near the other three of Jupiter's 
planet-sized moons - Europa, Ganymede and Callisto - a total 
of 27 times. 

The tour has relied on expert navigators to calculate several 
moves in advance, using each moon's gravity to help adjust the 
spacecraft's trajectory toward its various encounters.

However, the propellant supply needed for steering the 
spacecraft and keeping its antenna pointed toward Earth is now 
nearly exhausted. To avoid even a slim chance that Galileo 
could crash into Europa after its mission ends, NASA has 
decided to send it to a controlled demise in the crushing 
pressure of Jupiter's dense atmosphere. Galileo had earlier 
found evidence that Europa has a deep ocean of melted 
saltwater under its frozen surface, heightening interest in 
keeping Europa pristine for later studies of its potential for 
harboring extraterrestrial life.

Before its final plunge, Galileo will make the first close 
flyby of Amalthea, a small, inner moon of Jupiter, in November 
2002.

This week, Galileo will make direct measurements of the 
charged particles and magnetic environment around Io. Also, 
its camera and instruments for infrared and thermal imaging 
have been programmed to make observations during the flyby. As 
much of the data as possible will be transmitted to Earth from 
the spacecraft's tape recorder in coming months, Theilig said.

Io, like Earth's Moon, always keeps the same side facing 
inward toward its planet. On Thursday, Galileo will be in 
position for its best-ever look at the Jupiter-facing side of 
Io. "We're hoping to see areas we haven't seen well since 
Voyager imaged them back in 1979," said JPL's Dr. Torrence 
Johnson, Galileo project scientist. "We'd like to know more 
about rates of change for volcanic features on Io."  New 
observations are also planned for a previously inactive 
volcano that unexpectedly lofted a tall plume last summer.

On this swing through the inner portion of the Jovian system, 
Galileo will also examine storms on Jupiter itself and the Io 
torus, a doughnut-shaped band of charged particles encircling 
Jupiter at Io's distance from the planet.

A sporadic malfunction has affected performance of Galileo's 
camera since mid-2000, apparently due to radiation damage to 
an electronic component. The camera worked flawlessly during 
the most recent Io encounter in October 2001, but each time 
Galileo swings as close to Jupiter as Io's orbit, odds 
increase for more serious damage to the spacecraft from 
exposure to the planet's radiation belts.

Io is the innermost of Jupiter's four large moons.  Heat from 
tidal flexing powered by Jupiter's gravitational pull makes it 
the most volcanically active world in the solar system, with 
an estimated 200 to 300 volcanoes rapidly resurfacing it.

Galileo left Earth aboard the space shuttle Atlantis in 1989. 
JPL, a division of the California Institute of Technology in 
Pasadena, Calif., manages the Galileo mission for NASA's 
Office of Space Science in Washington. 

Additional information about the mission is available online 
at: http://galileo.jpl.nasa.gov 
                          - end - 
