Dwayne Brown
Headquarters, Washington               March 18, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726)

Doug Peterson
Johnson Space Center, Houston
(Phone: 281/483-5111)

RELEASE: 02-55

ASTRONAUTS ASSIGNED FOR SPACE STATION EXPEDITION TRAINING

     As continuous habitation of the International Space 
Station (ISS) nears the 18-month mark, NASA has named 
crewmembers to begin specialized training for future long-
term expeditions to the orbiting research facility.

Three crewmembers have been assigned to train for the ninth 
expedition aboard the station. Veteran Russian Cosmonaut 
Gennady I. Padalka (Col., Russian Air Force) will serve as 
station commander, and first-time flyers Astronaut E. Michael 
Fincke (Lt. Col., USAF) and Cosmonaut Oleg D. Kononenko will 
serve as flight engineers for Expedition Nine.

Padalka previously served as commander of Russian Space 
Station Mir Mission 26 and ISS Expedition Four backup 
commander. A graduate of the Eisk Military Aviation College, 
he served as a pilot and senior pilot in the Russian Air 
Force. 

Fincke, a member of the 1996 astronaut class, served as 
backup flight engineer for Expedition Four. He has two 
Bachelor of Science degrees from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT), a master's in Aeronautics and 
Astronautics from Stanford University, and a master's in 
Physical Sciences (Planetary Geology) from the University of 
Houston-Clear Lake. Kononenko has a degree from the Kharkov 
Aviation Institute and a post-graduate degree from the 
Kuibyshev Aviation Institute (Samara). 

Astronaut Daniel M. Tani, who flew in space for the first 
time aboard STS-108 in December 2001, will serve as Fincke's 
backup for Expedition Nine. Tani, also a member of the 1996 
astronaut class, has undergraduate and graduate degrees in 
mechanical engineering from MIT. Cosmonauts Aleksandr F. 
Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko will serve Russian backup 
crewmembers.  

Astronaut John L. Phillips, Ph.D., has been named as backup 
flight engineer for Expedition Seven, replacing Paul 
Richards, who resigned from NASA last month to pursue private 
interests. Richards flew as a mission specialist on STS-102 
in March 2001. 

Phillips was a member of the STS-100 crew in April 2001 and 
had been assigned as a backup crewmember for the Expedition 
Eight crew. Replacing Phillips in that role is Charles J. 
Camarda, Ph.D. Camarda is a member of the 1996 astronaut 
class and currently serves as a Mission Control Center 
communicator with the space station crew. He is a graduate of 
the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn. He has a master's 
degree from George Washington University and a doctorate in 
aerospace engineering from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University. Camarda joins astronaut Leroy Chiao and 
cosmonaut Mikhail B. Kornienko as the backup crew for 
Expedition Eight.

Additional information on the crews, their missions and 
ongoing space station operations can be found on the NASA 
human space flight Web site at 
http://spaceflight.nasa.gov

                          -end-

