Michael Braukus
Headquarters, Washington                    March 26, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1979)

RELEASE:  02-60

NASA SELECTS INVENTIONS OF THE YEAR

     A miniature pump designed to help your heart beat and a 
device that insures the safety of the International Space 
Station and its crew have received NASA's commercial and 
government invention of the year awards.

Receiving NASA's Commercial Invention of the Year is a 
miniature ventricular-assist device (VAD). Initially called 
the NASA/DeBakey heart pump, it is based in part on 
technology used in Space Shuttle fuel pumps. It is intended 
as a long-term "bridge" to a heart transplant, or as a more 
permanent device to help patients toward recovery and a more 
normal life.

The concept for the pump began with talks between Dr. Michael 
DeBakey of Houston's Baylor College of Medicine and one of 
his heart transplant patients, NASA engineer David Saucier. 
Saucier, who worked at NASA's Johnson Space Center in 
Houston, knew first-hand the urgency heart-failure patients 
feel waiting for a donor heart. He also knew Space Shuttle 
technology. 

Six months after his 1984 heart transplant, Saucier was back 
at work and arranged for fellow NASA engineers James 
Akkerman, Bernard Rosenbaum, Gregory Aber and Richard Bozeman 
to meet with Dr. DeBakey, Dr. George Noon and other Baylor 
staff. The result was a remarkable battery-operated pump - 
approximately 3 inches long, 1 inch in diameter and weighing 
less than four ounces - that seems to be an answer to the 
decades-long quest to develop an implantable VAD.

NASA, in keeping with its mission of transferring space-based 
technology to the private sector, granted exclusive rights to 
MicroMed Technology Inc., Houston, in 1996 after intense 
competition. In European trials, the MicroMed/DeBakey VAD was 
implanted in 115 persons without any incidence of device 
failure. U.S. trials will involve 178 implants of which 21 
have already been successfully performed.

The NASA Government Invention of the Year goes to a team from 
the agency's Glenn Research Center in Cleveland. The team 
invented a hollow cathode assembly that is the primary 
component of the International Space Station's plasma 
contactor system. This mission-critical system protects the 
station and its crew from the dangers associated with 
electrical charges.

As the space station floats through space in low-Earth orbit, 
the surface of the structure builds up a static high-voltage 
charge. The plasma contactor system safely grounds the 
station from this high voltage protecting it from arcing, 
which could severely damage its surface. This device is 
unique in that it reduces the static charge in a self-
regulating manner to levels safe enough for astronaut 
spacewalks.

The team of Michael Patterson, Timothy Verhey and George 
Soulas developed the technology from a laboratory device to 
flight qualified hardware, and manufactured the space flight 
hardware for the orbiting research platform. The team's 
efforts also resulted in increasing hollow cathodes lifetimes 
from 500 hours to 28,000 hours, enabling their use on ion 
thrusters, a key technology used for NASA spacecraft missions 
such as Deep Space 1.

                          -end-
