





David E. Steitz
Headquarters, Washington                                  April 1, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1730)

Cynthia M. O'Carroll
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone: 301/614-5563)

RELEASE: 02-62

NASA PINPOINTS WHERE RAIN COMES FROM AND WHERE IT GOES

 A new NASA computer model can now tell exactly where in the world rain 
or snow that provides local water originated. Scientists can use this 
"water vapor tracer" to improve rainfall and drought forecasts and gain 
a deeper understanding of climate change.

The model simulates water movement in the atmosphere around the world, 
and traces it from the places where it evaporates to the places where 
it falls back to Earth. 

"If I see rain or snow in the central U.S., I can now tell you how much 
of the moisture came from the Gulf of Mexico, how much came from the 
tropical Atlantic Ocean and so on," said meteorologist Mike Bosilovich 
of NASA's Data Assimilation Office at Goddard Space Flight Center in 
Greenbelt, Md. Bosilovich is lead author of the study being published 
in the March-April issue of the Journal of Hydrometeorology. "The model 
gives us a much clearer picture of how water moves in the atmosphere 
than we have ever had before."

By identifying water vapor movement in the atmosphere, weather 
forecasters will better understand how evaporation from a particular 
place contributes to local and regional precipitation, leading to more 
accurate weather forecasts. The model can actually pinpoint individual 
regional sources of atmospheric moisture, rather than combining them. 
Bosilovich said if scientists can understand how geographic sources of 
atmospheric moisture fluctuate from year to year, they also will have a 
clearer picture of how climate changes in the long term.

The atmosphere over North America receives moisture evaporated from 
many different water sources. For example, while clouds above the West 
Coast generally originate in the Pacific Ocean, those over the Midwest 
are more likely to have come from the Gulf of Mexico. Water from 
previous storms also evaporates from the land, contributing to the mix. 

"You might visualize each region of a continent or ocean as having a 
kind of 'smokestack,'" Bosilovich explained. "Each 'smokestack' sends 
up a plume of water vapor that mixes with the air."

But what complicates matters is that these "smokestacks" send up 
different-sized plumes of moisture at different times, and changes in 
wind and temperature can push them in different directions depending on 
the day or season. Until very recently, even the fastest computers had 
trouble keeping track of all the variables.

Bosilovich and Siegfried Schubert, who works with Bosilovich, have 
demonstrated the model's capabilities by analyzing the atmospheric 
water cycles over India and North America. They chose to analyze the 
cycles during the summer months over a period of six years, since both 
regions experience monsoons from June through August, and provide a 
great deal of moisture to track.

They found that while precipitation in India often comes directly from 
the ocean, much of what falls on the United States in the summertime 
can be "recycled" moisture -- water from previous storms that 
evaporates from the ground and then falls again quickly nearby. "The 
model could assess how strongly this recycling of water contributed to 
floods like the devastating Mississippi River flood of 1993," 
Bosilovich said.

Bosilovich is currently applying the data from the 1993 flood to the 
water-vapor tracer model, to gain a better insight into the processes 
that generated the flood. Analyzing past weather events will help him 
refine his model's operation, a necessity if it is ever to make 
accurate predictions of future weather.

"Currently, the only hard data the model accounts for is sea surface 
temperature; everything else is simulated. Our next big job is to work 
more observational data into the model, so it can reflect actual global 
atmospheric conditions," said Bosilovich. Such improvements will take 
time, but could lead scientists to better understanding of both next 
week's weather and the next century's climate.
 
The work is supported by grants from the joint NASA-NOAA Warm Season 
Precipitation Initiative and NASA's Earth Science Enterprise.

Additional information is available at:

http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/topstory/20020401watervapor.html

- end -
