Michael Braukus
Headquarters, Washington             Feb. 26, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1979)

RELEASE: 02-36

NASA PUBLICATION BRINGS SPACE TECHNOLOGY DOWN TO EARTH

     One of the most important byproducts of aerospace 
exploration and research is finding ways to apply these 
cutting-edge technologies to life here on Earth. Many of the 
conveniences people take for granted today were first 
developed by NASA.

These latest agency innovations are now featured in the 2001 
issue of Spinoff.  A new video enhancement tool and a non-
invasive heart monitor are just a couple of the agency's 
nearly 50 commercialized products featured. 

In addition to highlighting new commercial products benefiting 
from NASA technology, Spinoff revisits past innovations in a 
special millennium feature-section.

Since 1976, Spinoff has showcased more than 1,300 public 
benefits of NASA's commercial partnerships with private 
industry. The publication also covers the agency's research 
and development activities and serves as a reference resource 
to the agency's commercial technology network.

Since NASA's inception in 1958, technologies resulting from 
the space program have introduced Americans to hundreds of new 
or improved products. The 2001 Spinoff describes the latest 
products in the areas of health and medicine, transportation, 
public safety, computer technology, manufacturing technology, 
consumer/home/recreation, and environment and resources 
management. 

Online versions of Spinoff, beginning with the 1996 issue, are 
available on the World Wide Web. The Spinoff Web site also 
contains a searchable database of all technologies featured 
the past 26 years. Companies interested in featuring their 
product in Spinoff or anyone wishing to request the latest 
issue can find contact information on the Web site.

Media representatives interested in obtaining a print copy of 
Spinoff may contact the National Technology Transfer Center by 
telephone at 800/678-6882. Further questions may be addressed 
by e-mail to the editors at spinoff@sti.nasa.gov

Additional information about the NASA Technology network and 
an online version of Spinoff are available on the Internet at:

http://www.sti.nasa.gov/tto/

http://www.nctn.hq.nasa.gov/

                           - end -
 
