Dwayne Brown/Bob Jacobs
Headquarters, Washington                  March 4, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726/1600)

RELEASE: 02-42

NASA ADMINISTRATOR SELECTS NEW BIOLOGICAL 
AND PHYSICAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR

     Mary E. Kicza today was named Associate Administrator 
for Biological and Physical Research at NASA Headquarters in 
Washington, effective March 11. Kicza is currently Associate 
Center Director at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, 
Greenbelt, Md. 

At Goddard, she is the senior manager responsible for 
coordinating and integrating all Goddard space science, Earth 
science, and enabling technology programs and activities.

In making the selection, NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe 
praised Kicza's extensive management experience. "For two 
decades, Mary has managed an extremely diverse scientific 
community. She has the leadership skills and the management 
expertise to bring NASA's fields of physics, chemistry and 
biology together into a truly dynamic and successful 
program."

As Associate Administrator, Kicza will manage an office 
dedicated to conducting basic and applied research to support 
human exploration of space, and to taking advantage of the 
space environment as a laboratory for scientific, 
technological and commercial research.

She began her NASA career in 1982 at the Kennedy Space Center 
in Florida, where she was lead systems engineer for the 
Centaur Engineering Support Group and test coordinator for 
computer systems supporting the program's tests and launches.

From 1994 to 1996, she was the Assistant Associate 
Administrator for Technology for the Office of Space Science 
at NASA Headquarters in Washington. From 1992 to 1994, she 
held two positions at the same time, serving as Deputy 
Division Director for the Office of Space Science's Solar 
System Exploration Division and working as Program Manager 
for the newly formed Discovery Program, which included the 
highly successful Mars Pathfinder mission.

Prior to her current assignment at Goddard, Kicza was 
Associate Center Director for Space Science Programs, where 
she was the senior person responsible for management of all 
of the center's space science programs. While in the 
position, she also served as co-chair of the team performing 
independent annual reviews of the International Space Station 
and its research programs.

"In leading this office, you have to be able to juggle a lot 
of disciplines at the same time," added Administrator 
O'Keefe. "Mary will work closely with our new Chief 
Scientist, Dr. Shannon Lucid, in identifying and implementing 
this agency's scientific research goals and objectives in 
space. 

Kicza is the recipient of NASA's Exceptional Performance 
Award and in 1998 was conferred the rank of Meritorious 
Executive in the Senior Executive Service for sustained 
superior accomplishment in the management of programs of the 
United States government. She has a bachelor's degree in 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering from California State 
University, Sacramento, and a master's degree in Business 
Administration from the Florida Institute of Technology.

She replaces Dr. Kathie Olsen, who has been serving as both 
Acting Associate Administrator and Chief Scientist for the 
agency. The President has announced his intention to nominate 
Olsen as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (OSTP) in the Executive Office of the 
President.

Additional information about the NASA Office of Biological 
and Physical Research is available on the Internet at:

http://spaceresearch.nasa.gov/

                          -end-
