Dwayne C. Brown
Headquarters, Washington                   March 12, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1726)

RELEASE: 02-48

NASA SELECTS PURDUE TEAM TO HELP DEVELOP
LIFE-SUPPORTING ECOSYSTEM IN SPACE

     NASA's Office of Biological and Physical Research has 
selected Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, for a 
five-year grant totaling $10 million to lead a NASA 
Specialized Center of Research and Training (NSCORT) for 
Advanced Life Support (ALS) that will develop technologies to 
enable long-duration planetary missions and sustain human 
space colonies.

This ALS NSCORT will consist of a consortium of institutions 
that includes Purdue and two historically black universities, 
Alabama A&M University in Normal, Alabama, and Howard 
University in Washington. Scientists and engineers from all 
three institutions will work together to conduct research on a 
number of self-sustaining technologies required for long-
duration space missions, including solid-waste processing, 
water recovery and air revitalization, and food processing and 
food safety.

"I'm very pleased with the outstanding proposal received from 
Purdue and look forward to a rich and productive scientific 
return that can help substantially reduce the cost of 
supporting humans on future long-duration space missions," 
said Dr. Guy Fogleman, Acting Director for the Bioastronautics 
Research Division and lead for the Advanced Human Support 
Technology Program at NASA Headquarters in Washington.

The team of investigators will work to design a self-
sustaining environment for future space colonies where the 
inhabitants will live inside fully enclosed structures; grow 
their own food; and constantly process, recycle and purify all 
wastes. Plants will provide a source of food and oxygen, 
microbes will be used to break down wastes, and other 
technologies will be needed to remove impurities from the air 
and water.

The ALS NSCORT was established to advance fundamental 
knowledge in life-support technologies with the ultimate 
application of enabling human space flight and long-term 
planetary missions. This NSCORT is expected to enhance NASA's 
base of scholarship, skills and performance in space 
biological and biomedical sciences and related technological 
areas. The effort also will expand the pool of research 
scientists and engineers trained to meet the challenges ahead 
as NASA prepares for human space exploration missions. 

NASA received four proposals from universities in response to 
the research solicitation released in July 2001. Proposals 
were peer-reviewed by scientific and technical experts from 
academia and government before a selection was made. 
Evaluation of proposals also included review by NASA program 
scientists and managers for programmatic relevance and cost.

Additional information about the NASA Office of Biological and 
Physical Research is available on the Internet at: 

http://spaceresearch.nasa.gov/

                             -end-
