Michael Braukus
Headquarters, Washington              March 11, 2002
(Phone: 202/358-1979)

Fred Johnsen
Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif.
(Phone: 661/276-2998)

RELEASE: 02-47

NEW MEXICO EXPERIMENTS AID AIRSPACE SAFETY

     An alliance of teams from NASA, the U.S. Navy, New 
Mexico State University in Las Cruces and industry converges 
on Las Cruces, N.M., this week to demonstrate how remotely 
piloted aircraft can operate safely in the National Airspace 
System (NAS). Critical to gaining access to the skies is the 
requirement for remotely flown airplanes to be able to detect 
and avoid collision courses with other aircraft.

Using three detection systems, the teams working as part of 
NASA's Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology 
(ERAST) program will fly up to three aircraft, including a 
high-speed NASA F-18 jet, on simulated collision courses. 
Meanwhile onboard technology will automatically detect the 
threat and propose a flight path to keep the aircraft out of 
danger. While all the aircraft in the tests this week will 
have pilots onboard, the instrumented test airplane will use 
equipment intended to permit future uninhabited aircraft to 
avoid other airplanes in flight. This new sensor technology 
may also benefit commercial airliner safety. 

Central to the tests is the unorthodox Proteus aircraft built 
by Scaled Composites in Mojave, Calif. Proteus will carry 
see-and-avoid electronic devices that will detect incoming 
airplanes.

Aircraft manufacturers are devising a variety of unpiloted 
aircraft capable of performing long-duration missions. Low-
cost UAVs can be used to monitor wildfires, study 
environmental phenomena, relay cellular phone service, and 
keep an eye on petroleum pipelines and remote borders. But 
before these uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAVs) can fly 
routinely in the
national airspace along with traditional airplanes with 
pilots onboard, technologies must be validated to enable UAVs 
to mingle safely in the skies.

"The ERAST alliance has the opportunity to significantly 
increase the utility of remotely piloted aircraft by 
developing systems that enable UAVs to detect and avoid other 
aircraft," said NASA ERAST program manager Jeff Bauer of 
Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. 

"The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) must certify 
remotely piloted aircraft before they will be allowed to fly 
in the national airspace," Bauer explained. "Our allied 
efforts can help open the door to airspace use by UAVs. We 
can recommend certification and regulatory procedures to the 
FAA based on actual flight verification of remotely piloted 
aircraft safety systems."

The goals of this week's flights over southwestern New Mexico 
are to demonstrate see-and-avoid equipment capabilities, and 
to show how a remotely piloted aircraft can be in constant 
communication with its ground pilot, even at distances over 
the horizon, by relaying signals via satellites.

The flight tests mobilize the resources of Dryden and ERAST 
partners, including the New Mexico State University Technical 
Analysis and Applications Center (TAAC) in Las Cruces, Scaled 
Composites, the Navy, and Modern Technology Solutions, Inc. 
(MTSI) of Alexandria, Va. FAA observers plan to witness the 
operations at Las Cruces.

For the tests, Proteus has been fitted with a Skywatch HP 
traffic advisory system, a radio-based device for detecting 
other aircraft. Additionally, Proteus carries two "non-
cooperative" sensors -- devices that don't require signals or 
transmissions from any other source -- to detect the presence 
and course of other aircraft. These sensors are an 
Engineering 2000 infrared sensor and an Amphitech radar, both 
mounted in the nose of Proteus.

Bauer says success over Las Cruces will be measured by the 
effectiveness of the "cooperative" Skywatch system to alert 
Proteus' ground controller of flight path conflicts to enable 
the controller to alter Proteus' flight out of harm's way. 

Flight scenarios include having aircraft approach Proteus 
from a variety of angles and airspeeds. For safety, the 
aircraft will maintain an actual vertical or lateral 
separation during the approaches; the detection equipment can 
be calibrated to perceive this as a simulated threat at the 
same place as Proteus will fly. 

Limited numbers of reporters will be able to observe control 
room activity and the last Proteus test flight Thursday, 
March 14, at the Las Cruces International Airport.

On Friday, March 15, Proteus will make local demonstration 
flights for middle school and high school students attending 
an educational program about the ERAST tests. At 11:30 a.m. 
Mountain time at the airport, program managers will brief 
reporters.

                             -end-

NOTE TO EDITORS: Media representatives should contact Sherri 
Clark, New Mexico State University TAAC, at 505/646-5033 for 
more information on coverage opportunities at Las Cruces 
International Airport. 


